The Digital Future of Humanities through the Lens of DIY
                    Culture
Henriette                        Roued-Cunlife
8 November 2016


Introduction
Do the humanities by necessity have a digital future? This question is answered
by understanding the humanities as the study of human culture and cultural
material, both on and off the Internet. This paper will use DIY
(Do-It-Yourself) cultural material and practises as a way to understand this.
First the phrase and concept of DIY culture will be unpacked:
DIY culture is here defined as the social world of people engaged in DIY
activities, which can be anything from building a shed or knitting a sweater to
running a food co-op, with the prerequisite that the practitioner has no
relevant formal education or training. DIY culture can, in many ways, be seen as
simultaneously an online and an offline culture, with a complex relationship
between digital and non-digital activity and interaction. Due to its rising
relevance, particularly on the internet, it is important that the humanities
include the study of DIY culture and its cultural products - digital,
non-digital and everything in between.
The humanities are generally defined as the disciplines that examine human
culture, or in other words the products of the human mind, both tangible and
intangible, such as music, arts, crafts, rituals, literature and linguistics.
The humanities have a long history of attempting to understand these different
products of the past and the present. The methods with which these attempts have
been made often strongly depend on the formats of the material as well as on the
technology that is available to the scholars in question (#bod2014)
This paper suggests that cultural material produced by DIY practicioners should
be the subject of much future research in the humanities, and through examining
both products and practices from DIY culture, we can understand the future of
humanities scholarship as both digital and non-digital, online and offline.
DIY culture
DIY culture constitutes an important part of human culture today. Gelber (1999)
portrays productive leisure activities (hobbies) as an antidote to
more problematic leisure activities (e.g. drinking or gambling) and idleness
following in the wake of the separation of work and leisure brought on by
industrialisation. An antidote supported by authorities:
Teachers, recreation directors, journalists, and other
voices of authority have felt free to encourage the autonomy and
creativity of hobbies because even if they sensed that hobbies could
critique regular work, they also recognized that hobbies’ triumph over
idleness was a victory for the values of a market economy.
(#gelber1999)

In other words:
Hobbies have been a way to confirm the verities of
work and the free market inside the home so long as remunerative
employment has remained elsewhere.
(#gelber1999)

Gelber uses the existing term hobbies (which after 1880 came to be
known as a productive use of free time rather than a dangerous obsession) to
talk about productive leisure activities such as collecting, handicrafts,
husbandry, amateurism and volunteerism. Stebbins, on the other hand, has
hobbies, amateurism and volunteerism side by side as different types of serious
leisure pursuits (#stebbins2007). In Gelber’s view, DIY (which
includes crafts and maintenance) is a less creative and more productive hobby
focussing on producing something useful and perhaps necessary to the household.
Matchar, on the other hand, focuses on the household aspects in the term
new domesticity - returning to productivity in the home:
Our nostalgia for old-fashioned home and hearth has
transformed our food culture as well. Who hasn’t tried canning jam or
making their own pickles? Young women who, had they been of age in the
1990s, might have been boozing it up in the Meatpacking District [New
York neighbourhood] are now spending Saturday nights baking cupcakes and
photographing them for their food blogs. The kinds of kitchen work once
associated with Depression-era farmwives - making curds and whey,
preserving sauerkraut, grinding flour - are now thoroughly unremarkable
pastimes for young people flush with today’s DIY back-to-basics
spirit.
(#matchar2013)

Both note that times of recession and economic crises give rise to more work-like
and productive leisure activities supported by a media focus on
good-things-to-do when there was nothing to do
(#gelber1999)
. Matchar particularly notes the spread of anti-authoritarian
disillusionment and this could be seen as a result of the ease of which ideas
and information can and has spread on the internet during the latest recession.
The internet furthermore plays a large role in the aspects of DIY and DIY
culture.
DIY culture is here defined as a social world surrounding DIY practitioners.
Unruh uses social worlds to refer to a social organisation that cannot be
defined by spatial, territorial, formal or membership boundaries (#unruh1980). Instead, a social world is defined through
interaction and communication. DIY culture exists worldwide and varieties of DIY
culture can be seen in most societies. There are no rules on how you engage with
DIY culture and anyone can be part of it. Although there are no spatial,
territorial, formal or membership boundaries of DIY culture, it exists through
interaction and communication.
When examining DIY culture it is not the DIY activities as such that are the
focus. How a sweater is knitted or how the shed is built is secondary here. In
fact, the act of knitting a sweater or building a shed is not in itself a DIY
activity as these tasks can also be accomplished by professionals with the
relevant formal education or training. The focus lies instead on how information
is gathered that enables people to build sheds, or the social setting in which
someone is motivated and gathers knowledge that enables them to knit the
sweater, when they have had no formal training to do so. Thus, it is the
autodidact information behaviour, which is the foundation of DIY activities,
that is of interest here.
DIY practitioners have no formal training or education in this particular
activity. To do it yourself in the rawest form implies
being completely self-taught. However, instead of the word self-taught, Solomon
suggest using the term autodidactism:
So self-taught will not quite do
as a complete description of the autodidact. We need a word to describe
a range of people who prefer to teach themselves or to pick up knowledge
from non-teaching situations, in one way or another.
(#solomon2003)

Solomon further argues that from the time they are born humans are constantly
being taught, or allowing themselves to be taught:
Every time someone speaks, or points out a bird doing
something strange on the lawn, or reconfigures the computer slowly
enough for us to follow - if we want to, we are being taught.
(#solomon2003)

Solomon’s understanding of autodidact learning is not one of solitude, but rather
one where we are seeking out learning and knowledge from other people. This is
closely related to research in Human Information Behaviour, especially that in
our everyday life:
Information Behaviour is the totality of human behaviour
in relation to sources and channels of information, including both
active and passive information seeking, and information use. Thus, it
includes face-to-face communication with others, as well as the passive
reception of information as in, for example, watching TV advertisements,
without any intention to act on the information given.
(#wilson2000)

Information behaviour (#fisher2006) typically focussed more on
one-way access to information and the ways in which the individual can use this
information. However, the field of Everyday Life Information Seeking (#savolainen1995) (ELIS) has lead to a more rounded understanding
of information behaviour, which includes the social and collaborative nature of
human interaction with information (i.e. the field of CIB - Collaborative
Information Behaviour) (#talja2006). Thus, information behaviour
is a complex area of seeking, finding, sharing, creating new and remixing old
information. In everyday life this information behaviour becomes even more
complex in a world of overlapping tasks for which information is sought, found,
shared, presented and even ignored or discarded (#karlova2013).
Therefore, most ELIS studies tend to focus on a certain task or activity for
which it is easier to identify a group of participants. This could, for example,
be parenting (#mckenzie2003), gourmet
cooking (#hartel2010)
Nevertheless, I would argue that there is a general aspect in all DIY activities
that usually require a certain amount of autodidact information behaviour in
order to engage with the activity. This has been the case since the first
mentions of a DIY movement in the 1950s (#mead1957) where there
was an increase in instructions on how-to do it yourself experienced a boom.
This how-to genre has developed into a DIY activity in itself and this type of
material is ever growing on the Internet and in print. The enormous amounts of
information sharing currently going on between DIY practitioners around the
world is creating a new type of cultural material that we in the humanities need
to understand in order to understand current culture.
On and offline
DIY culture can in many ways be seen as simultaneously an online and an offline
culture, with a complex relationship between digital and non-digital activity
and interaction. In order to make this argument we will begin by looking at the
relationship between time spent on and off the internet, for people of all age
groups.
Sigman argues that time spent online displaces face-to-face contact, and he
explains how in turn this lack of face-to-face interaction has been shown to
relate to increased illness and premature mortality (#sigman2009).
While the connection between lack of social interaction and health issues is
strong, it seems to be more difficult to find specific connections between
internet use and health issues. Findings here are more mixed, with some studies
showing a more positive correlation. As an example, Cotton and colleagues showed
how internet use among older adults (50 years or older) reduced depression
categorization by 33%(#cotten2012)
This is furthermore an area where it is important to keep in mind the differences
between correlation and causality. If we make the assumption that there is a
correlation between a high degree of loneliness and a large amount of time spent
online, do people who spend much time online become lonely as a result of less
face-to-face contact or is it the case that people who are lonely spend more
time online, perhaps in order to achieve more social contact via a digital
media? Another suggestion is that there is a third factor involved which causes
a high degree of both loneliness and spending time online, for example bullying
or a general lack of closeness in one’s social network. It is not an easy
question to answer and findings seem to depend on the groups of people that are
studied. Staying with the example of loneliness, which can take different shapes
(e.g. social or emotional loneliness), the size of social networks can for
example have a larger impact on the social loneliness of young adults, while the
lack of closeness to other members of a social network can have a larger impact
on the social loneliness on older adults (#green2001)
Nevertheless, the internet does provide an opportunity to connect with
like-minded people or those with similar interests across large physical as well
as social distances.
In an attempt to teach the elderly to use computers with the prospect of enabling
connectivity, as shown above, it made sense to change the focus of the syllabus
towards teaching them to use the internet rather than the computer
itselfThe class IT for beginners taught by the
author took place through the community learning programme AOF in Denmark,
Autumn 2013. Through this experience I identified the three most
important things to teach them about the internet:

How to access information on the internet,
How to communicate and interact socially on the internet, and
How to express themselves and share information on the internet.

Each step led small groups of elderly individuals to a new level of motivation to
use the internet. Despite their expectations at the beginning of the course, at
no point were they taught anything particularly technical.
The tech industry, amongst others, despairs over the lack of understanding of
technology (#bt2015) among children, of which 71% (of 5-15 year
olds in the UK) (#ofcom) have access to tablet computers at home,
and I am sympathetic to their plight. The future of the tech industry relies on
young people interested in working within that discipline and industry. However,
we need to consider the following difficult and troubling suggestion:
even though young people grow up surrounded by
technology, many of them don’t understand the basic concepts of how it
works – which will leave them unable to fully participate in
society
(#bt2015)
. Statements like this assume that an understanding of how the internet
and the technology behind the internet works is necessary for participation in
society. But does technology shape society or culture, or is it culture and
society that shape technology?
Technology is a product of the human mind, not the other way around. So perhaps
the issue with young people's understanding of the internet is that they
understand it differently from those who did not grow up with it. For the older
generation a computer is still technology, it is apart from us. For the younger
generation, on the other hand, it is perhaps not. For them the computer provides
opportunities to connect - the internet an abstraction which they only
experience when it is not available.
Another pertinent question is will their future necessarily be
digital? Will the younger generation experience very little
face-to-face or in-real-life interaction with other people? Mcclure suggests
that even babies can differentiate between real live interaction via screen on
the one hand and pre-recorded video on the other (#mcclure2013)
(#lafrance2015). This could mean that for the younger generation
communication mediated via screen bears a closer resemblance to physical
socialising than to screen entertainment. Thus there is no need to understand
technology, in order to socially interact with others via digital media. It is
just a means for us as humans to connect, to access information, to express
ourselves and of course to be entertained.
Many people use the internet to express themselves creatively (a large part of
DIY culture), some use it to express other very human sentiments, with varying
degrees of sympathy. It is intriguing to see how connecting via the internet
increasingly opens up to connecting in the physical world. From blogger meetups
of the 00’s to finding on Ravelry Online knitting and crochet community
(www.ravelry.com/) a fellow
knitter that lives in your own neighbourhood. The internet is giving us the
opportunity to find and connect with people who have similar values and
interests; connections that pre-internet would have been very difficult to make.
The internet has a great influence on DIY culture as much as DIY culture
certainly has a great influence on the internet. As mentioned above, a large
part of DIY culture is the use of autodidact information behaviour. It does not
seem so much to be a question of whether the internet plays a large role in this
information behaviour or, if not, in fact autodidact information behaviour lays
the foundation for the internet, but rather if the internet would be as
widespread as it is today (and continually growing), if we humans did not in the
first place engage in autodidact information behaviour?
But what about the non-digital world - the offline, the physical world? Most DIY
activities are in some way very firmly grounded in the physical world. Knitting
a sweater is a very physical activity. As is building a shed and running a food
co-op. Running a food co-op is particularly physical and social in its very
nature. Therefore, while a large part of autodidact information behaviour in DIY
culture happens online, there is still a very large part of it that does
not.Based on preliminary conclusions from wider empirical study of
self-reported use of these autodidact information situations which the
author is currently conducting. This illustrates that in DIY
activities and DIY culture, the digital and the physical, being online and being
offline, more often than not go hand in hand. The relationship between digital
and physical material and immaterial culture is an interesting new area for the
humanities to study, not only within media and information studies but also
within arts, crafts, literature, music, heritage, and more. This would in many
cases traditionally have been analysed among professional cultural practitioners
and their cultural products. However, this paper argues that it may be just as
relevant to examine this among DIY practitioners and DIY products.
Humanities in a digital world
An important part of DIY culture today is autodidact information behaviour, much
of which (but far from all) is conducted on the internet. One of the results of
this is an enormous amount of information, of both high and low quality,
flooding the internet. It is generally very difficult to preserve this
information (#kasioumis2014), let alone understand it. Attempting
to understand products of culture and the human mind produced today is
challenging because these materials are very diverse and have increased so
immensely in number, particularly within DIY culture. New methods for analysing
large amounts of data are currently in focus under the heading of Big Data
analysis. However, any analysis of cultural products requires an understanding
of the culture and the material (#boyd2012). There are masses of
cultural products out there that we have not yet even begun to consider. At the
same time new formats and producers appear every single day, both digital and
non-digital, from the 25-year-old DIY music artist with a new single out on
vinyl, to the 75 year old DIY gardener with a popular Youtube channel.
Understanding these cultural products is a great challenge for humanities
research and will continue to be so in the future. Therefore the answer to the
question, Do the humanities by necessity have a digital
future? must be a resounding yes and no.
Yes, humanities research must attempt to understand cultural productions that
are digital. No, because if we look at DIY culture we will see that there most
likely will continue to be many cultural productions of non-digital material,
which humanities researchers must continue to study and understand. Perhaps the
future of the humanities is instead to learn from DIY practitioners and no
longer distinguish so sharply between the digital and the non-digital.
Furthermore, while the internet itself relies on technology, I argue that we
should not understand the contents of the internet as technological products,
but rather the products of the human mind or as cultural products. Historian Roy
Rosenzweig made this same point in relation to Wikipedia, saying that it was
the most important application of the principles of the
free and open-source software movement to the world of cultural, rather
than software, production
(#rosenzweig2006)
. The information shared, the opinions expressed, the communication about
common interests and the social interactions stem from humans and not machines.
Understanding machines or technology may give us some tools to study the
internet, but it will never give us the ability to understand the content. For
this we need methods developed for the understanding of cultural products, in
other words humanities methods. So, to answer the question again; yes, the
humanities do have a necessary digital future in that it will be necessary to
use digital tools to study both digital and non-digital material, and no,
because without traditional methods for understanding cultural products we
simply will not be able to understand either digital or non-digital material.
The implications of this yes and no answer can be understood
through the following two examples. The first is an example of computer
technology aiding humanities scholarship. The premise here was to examine how
technology could aid a scholar during the scholar's
reading of ancient documents (#rouedcunliffe2010). The italics are
added to emphasise that the scholar’s humanities-based methods for reading
stayed the same and that technology merely added speed or ease to certain
aspects of the process. For example the speed of finding parallel readings in
the same or other corpora or the ease with which evidence that supported certain
readings is remembered (#rouedcunliffe2013). In this example the
materials studied (i.e. ancient documents from the Roman fort of Vindolanda in
the North of England
http://vto2.classics.ox.ac.uk/) are cultural products that
at first were not digital. However, the fragile state of most of these documents
as well as the physical location of the scholars was such that the documents
studied were often in fact digital photographs. Here scholars moved from the
study of physical objects to the study of digital objects. The methods for
studying the documents were very traditional for the field of papyrology. Terras
describes the complex and cyclical process in the following way:
An expert reads an ancient document by identifying
visual features, and then incrementally building up knowledge about the
document’s characters, combinations of characters, words, grammar,
phrases, and meaning, continually proposing hypotheses, and checking
those against other information, until s/he finds that this process is
exhausted
(#terras2005)
.
Along the way there are aspects of this process that are typically done by
non-digital means but which can alternatively be aided by digital
technology. First is the identification of visual features where the scholars,
in the case of quite illegible incised texts, would typically use a light source
to cast a shadow on the document and by tipping the document to and fro this
enables the scholar to make out the incisions (#brady2005). This
is a cumbersome and unreliable method and therefore the project attempted to aid
this task with digital image processing techniques (#terras2012)
The second part of the process is the building up of knowledge about the
characters, words and phrases in the document. Typically, this will happen today
by keeping digital and non-digital notes about the different interpretations and
decisions made along the way. Therefore, attempts were made at showing how a
digital Decision Support System would enable the scholar to
organise and remember these interpretations and the basis on which they were
made (#rouedcunliffe2013).
The final part of the process, as described here, is checking against other
information. This traditionally required access to copies of published editions
that could contain relevant parallels to the documents being studied. Potential
parallels would be found by trawling through indices. This is a part of the
process of reading ancient documents where digital technology and the internet
has had a great influence. By digitally publishing interpreted editions online
(using XML), and by making them accessible through search engines this task has
become much lighter and has made the texts more easily accessible by scholars
around the world. As the example shows, even a traditional digital humanities
project that works with digital tools for the reading of handwritten texts
continually oscillates between digital and non-digital tools, methods and
material.
However, as this second example will show, the reading of handwritten texts is
not a method used only by scholars in academia. Genealogy is probably the most
well-known DIY activity in which the skill of reading old handwritten texts is
quite essential. My own experience of working with family history and engaging
with other genealogists has led to a few observations in relation to this
skill:

Genealogists, depending on their level of experience, usually have some
skills in reading handwritten texts, ranging from beginners to experts.
These experts are able to read Latin texts, written in a very illegible
Gothic script.
Experts and beginners alike usually collaborate on the reading of texts
that are related to their own family history and they do this both online
and offline.
Genealogists usually gather the skills and knowledge needed for this task
through the different autodidact information situations mentioned
above.
Genealogists use a greater variety of different digital tools and
platforms depending on their level of digital literacy, than I have
experienced among scholars.

For these skills particularly, genealogists and other amateur historians are
regularly used as volunteer transcribers in museums and archives. With digital
media and the internet, GLAM institutions (i.e. galleries, libraries, archives
and museums) are now able to structure these skills and use them more
efficiently to transcribe material in their collections; in other words, to use
these skills in crowdsourcing projects (#ridge2013)
This second example suggests that perhaps the skills involved are not what
separates the DIY practitioner from the professional practitioner, neither is
the need for social networking or collaboration. The motivations for reading
handwritten documents are most likely the same, namely recognition and
furthering their understanding of the subject at hand. Perhaps what really
divides the waters is the information behaviour and whether this is taught or it
is autodidact. The consequence of this difference is often that DIY
practitioners are in a position to be more adaptable and innovative in their use
of digital technology in a way that can be difficult within the organisational
structures surrounding the humanities.
Nevertheless, one lesson that can be learned from both examples is that the very
traditional humanities method of reading handwritten texts, whether or not it is
done as a DIY activity, will involve digital tools in one way or another.
Conclusion
DIY culture is a social world of people engaging in DIY activities, which have in
common that they are activities undertaken without any formal education or
training. Information behaviour in DIY culture is autodidact and information
sharing is informal and outside of organisational structures. Furthermore, it is
rarely dependant on funding and thus has the potential to incorporate innovative
solutions at a higher speed than we typically see in the humanities. This is why
on the one hand it is important for the Digital Humanities to look towards DIY
culture and learn from the methods and practises that occur here.
On the other hand, the information sought, created and shared within DIY culture,
both on– and offline, is a product of the human mind and can, along with more
traditional cultural products, be understood by humanities scholars. The
Internet is currently exploding with this material, alongside more frivolous
entertainment content. If we in the humanities want to understand our current
culture, now and in the future, we need to study DIY culture, both off- and
online to a much higher degree than is currently the case.
Therefore, the answer to the question whether the humanities by necessity have a
digital future is two-fold. Yes, the humanities need to employ digital tools in
order to understand culture and cultural products on the internet However,
humanities does not have a solely digital future as culture and cultural
products will continue to blossom offline and traditional humanities methods are
needed in order to understand these too.


Bod, Rens. A New
History of the Humanities, the Search for Principles and Patterns from
Antiquity to the Present. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2014.
Boyd, Danah, and Kate
Crawford. CRITICAL QUESTIONS FOR BIG DATA: Provocations for
a Cultural, Technological, and Scholarly Phenomenon.
Information, CommunicationSociety 15, no. 5
(2012): 662–79. doi:10.1080/1369118X.2012.678878.
Brady, Michael, X. Pan, Veit U. B.
Schenk, Melissa Terras, Paul Robertson, and N. Molton. Shadow Stereo, Image Filtering and Constraint Propagation. In
Images and Artefacts of the Ancient World,
edited by Alan K. Bowman and Michael Brady, 4:15–30. British Academy British
Academy Occasional Paper. Oxford University Press/British Academy, 2005.
BT. The Tech Literacy
Challenge: Building a Culture of Tech Literacy for the Nation, 2015.
http://home.bt.com/pages/techliteracy/BT_Tech_Literacy.pdf
Cotten, Shelia R., George Ford,
Sherry Ford, and Timothy M. Hale. Internet Use and
Depression among Older Adults.
Computers in Human Behavior 28, no. 2 (2012):
496.
Fisher, Karen E, Sanda Erdelez,
and Lynne E.F McKechnie. Theories of Information
Behavior. Medford, N.J: Published for the American Society for
Information Science and Technology by Information Today, 2006.
Gelber, Steven M. Hobbies : Leisure and the Culture of Work in America. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1999.
Green, Laura R., Deborah S.
Richardson, Tania Lago, and Elizabeth C. Schatten-Jones. Network Correlates of Social and Emotional Loneliness in Young and Older
Adults.
PersonalitySocial Psychology Bulletin 27,
no. 3 (2001): 281.
Hartel, Jenna. Managing Documents at Home for Serious Leisure: A Case Study of the Hobby
of Gourmet Cooking.
Journal of Documentation 66, no. 6 (2010):
847–74.
Karlova, Natascha A., and
Karen E. Fisher. A Social Diffusion Model of Misinformation
and Disinformation for Understanding Human Information Behaviour.
Information Research 18, no. 1 (2013). http://www.informationr.net/ir/18-1/paper573.html#.VZUGDhOqpBc
Kasioumis, Nikos, Vangelis
Banos, and Hendrik Kalb. Towards Building a Blog
Preservation Platform.
Internet and Web Information Systems 17, no. 4
(2014): 799–825.
LaFrance, Adrienne. 2015. Do Babies Know When They’re Skyping?
The Atlantic, September 10. http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/09/do-babies-know-when-theyre-skyping/404650/
Matchar, Emily. Homeward Bound: Why Women Are Embracing the New Domesticity. Simon
Schuster, 2013.
Mcclure, Elisabeth. 2013. Infant Emotional Engagement in Video Mediated
Interactions.
IDC ’13, 655–58.
doi:10.1145/2485760.2485874.
McKenzie, Pamela J. A Model of Information Practices in Accounts of Everyday-Life
Information Seeking.
Journal of Documentation 59, no. 1 (2003):
19–40.
Mead, M. (1957). The
Pattern of Leisure in Contemporary American Culture.
The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science, 313, 11–15.
Ofcom. Children and
Parents: Media Use and Attitudes Report, 2014. http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/research/media-literacy/media-use-attitudes-14/Childrens_2014_Report.pdf
Prigoda, Elena, and
Pamela J. McKenzie. Purls of Wisdom. Journal of Documentation 63, no. 1 (2007):
90–114.
Ridge, Mia. From
Tagging to Theorizing: Deepening Engagement with Cultural Heritage through
Crowdsourcing.
Curator: The Museum Journal 56, no. 4 (2013):
435–50.
Roued-Cunliffe,
Henriette. A Decision-Support System for the Reading of
Ancient Documents. Doctoral thesis, University of Oxford,
2013.
Roued-Cunliffe,
Henriette. Archiving Online Do-It-Yourself Culture.
Aarhus, Danmark, 2015. ref
target="http://events.netlab.dk/conference/index.php/resaw/june2015/paper/view/38
Roued-Cunliffe,
Henriette. Towards a Decision Support System for Reading
Ancient Documents.
Literary and Linguistic Computing 25, no. 4 (2010):
365–79. doi:10.1093/llc/fqq020.
Rosenzweig, R. (2006). Can History Be Open Source? Wikipedia and the Future of the
Past.
Journal of American History, 93(1), 117–146.
http://doi.org/10.2307/4486062
Savolainen, Reijo. Everyday Life Information Seeking: Approaching Information
Seeking in the Context of way of Life. Library and Information Science Research 17, no. 3
(1995): 259–94.
Sigman, Aric. Well Connected?: The Biological Implications of Social
Networking.
Biologist 56, no. 1 (2009). http://www.aricsigman.com/IMAGES/Sigman_lo.pdf
Skov, Mette. Hobby-Related Information-Seeking Behaviour of Highly Dedicated Online
Museum Visitors.
Information Research 18, no. 4 (2013). http://www.informationr.net/ir/18-4/paper597.html#.U_B7fUhDLw0
Solomon, Joan. Theories of Learning and the Range of Autodidactism. In The Passion to Learn : An Inquiry into Autodidactism,
edited by Joan Solomon, 3–23. London: RoutledgeFalmer, 2003.
Stebbins, Robert A. Serious Leisure: A Perspective for Our Time. New
Brunswick, N.J: Transaction Publishers, 2007.
Talja, Sanna, and Preben Hansen.
Information Sharing. In New Directions in Human Information Behavior, edited by Amanda
Spink and Charles Cole, 113–34. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer,
2006.
Terras, Melissa. Reading the Readers: Modelling Complex Humanities Processes to Build
Cognitive Systems.
Literary and Linguistic Computing 20 (2005):
41–59.
Terras, Melissa. Image Processing in the Digital Humanities. In Digital Humanities in Practice, edited by Claire Warwick, Melissa
Terras, and Julianne Nyhan. London: Facet Publishing, 2012. https://www-dawsonera-com.ep.fjernadgang.kb.dk/abstract/9781856049054
Unruh, David R. The
Nature of Social Worlds.
The Pacific Sociological Review 23, no. 3 (1980):
271–96.
Wilson, Tom D. Human Information Behaviour.
Informing Science 3, no. 2 (2000). https://www.ischool.utexas.edu/~i385e/readings/Wilson.pdf
Yakel, Elizabeth. Seeking Information, Seeking Connections, Seeking Meaning: Genealogists and
Family Historians. Genealogy, Family History, Information Seeking, Archives,
Personal Information Management.
Information Research: An International Electronic
Journal 10, no. 1 (2004): 205 – .
Yeoman, Alison. Applying McKenzie’s Model of Information Practices in Everyday Life
Information Seeking in the Context of the Menopause Transition.
Information Research 15, no. 4 (2010).

