Researcher as Bricoleur: Contextualizing
                    humanists’ digital workflows
Smiljana Antonijevic
Ellysa Stern Cahoy
19 November 2018

Introduction
Discussions of digital scholarship in the humanities have often been based on
assumptions about what humanists could do with digital technologies, and how
these technologies could influence their research, rather than on contextualized
analytical insights about what humanists are actually doing and how their
research practices change in the encounter with technology.
This paper presents the results of the Digital Scholarly
Workflow project, which implemented an ethnographic approach to
facilitate such contextualized understanding of humanists’ research workflows,
giving us valuable empirical insights into digital scholarship from the
perspective of individual scholars — how they search for, find, collect,
analyze, and when necessary digitize archival and other scholarly materials. Our
research approach builds on (#svensson2010), who called for the
examination of digital scholarship from the perspective of individual scholars’
daily practices, and (#kirschenbaum2014) who argued for the
analysis of digital humanities in action. Schonfeld (2015) similarly pointed out
that to understand researcher
practices, user experience specialists … should examine the researchers’
actual practices, for which
[taking], a more holistic,
ethnographic perspective is vital
(#schonfeld2015)
.
The Digital Scholarly Workflow project was
conducted at the Pennsylvania State University from 2012 to 2016 and funded by
the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. The first part of the project (2012-2014)
analyzed how scholars across disciplines engage with digital technologies at
different phases of the research lifecycle, pointing at gaps in existing tools,
services, and infrastructures (see: (#antonijevi); ). While acknowledging the importance of
domain-based and subject-specific research practices across the humanities (see:
(#wineburg2001)), our study sought to understand some of the
common features of humanists’ digital workflows as compared to those in the
sciences, and to identify the distinctive features that software architecture
should have in order to support humanists’ research.
The first phase of our project thus identified preferences and areas of strain
in the research workflows — specifically around discovery, organization, and
storage of research materials — and revealed distinct disciplinary differences.
For instance, humanities scholars preferred using local discovery tools, such as
the Penn State library catalog, more often than Sciences faculty. Humanists also
noted a lack of digital technology use in data collection and analysis phases of
their research process. Further, humanities scholars had the highest percentage
of lost and inaccessible research files, and were more likely than other
disciplines to curate their research file collections. Finally, phase I showed
that integration of digital tools into humanists’ search activities often
resulted in a breakdown of their systems for organizing information, previously
developed for print based materials (#antonijevi)
Building on those findings, phase II of our study (2014-2016) focused on
observing humanists’ research and use of digital research tools in situ, through a series of contextual inquiry
sessions. Contextual inquiry showed that digital technologies have transformed
scholarly work in the humanities not only as reflected in the discourse of
digital humanities, but through daily practices of working scholars and through
some perhaps surprising integrations with long standing analog work routines. In
this paper we demonstrate, for instance, how impromptu on-site digitization of
archival materials with the use of digital cameras change scholars’ research in
both rewarding and challenging ways. Through such practices scholars build rich
personal collections of digitized primary sources, which become one of the
central information resources in their work. Our findings show, however, that
digital tools and resources do not necessarily replace analog or compete for the
dominant position, but form an interconnected stream, illustrative of the
bricolage character of humanists’ digital workflows.
Our view of humanists as bricoleurs builds on conceptual understanding of
bricolage developed over the past fifty years. While the notion of bricolage as
a process and bricoleur as an agent derives from Lévi-Strauss’s (1962) analysis
of mythical thinking, it assumed broader epistemological meaning already in this
original account. Soon after, and thanks to its broad generative capacity,
bricolage attained the status of a universal concept applied across knowledge
domains as diverse as evolutionary biology (#jacob1977),
interpersonal relationships (#conville1997), nursing
(#gobbi2004), digital
culture (#deuze2006),
migration studies (#craciun2013), political scienceand so on. In fact, just a brief Google
Scholar search reveals that the title of this paper is far less original
than we hoped it would be, inadvertently following in the footsteps of
Pinar’s (2001) The Researcher as Bricoleur: The Teacher
as Public Intellectual, and the series that includes student as
bricoleur (#schnelker2006), teacher as bricoleur , and so forth. The concept of bricolage
also became used in the context of scholarly work, specifically related to
interdisciplinarity and multiperspectivism in the adoption of research methods,
data sources, and theories (see: (#denzin2000); ).
Our analysis of bricolage in humanists’ scholarly work does not follow this
trajectory of explicit methodological and epistemological examination, nor does
it consider Derrida’s (1997/1967) approach to bricolage as discourse. Rather, we
seek to return to Lévi-Strauss’s inquiry into bricolage as situated practice and
its specific ideology of unscripted approach to technology expressed in the
comparison between engineers and bricoleurs discussed in more detail in the
conclusion of this essay (see also: (#johnson2012)). Along these
lines we argue that humanists observed in our study engage with digital tools in
a highly personal, unscripted way, which corresponds to their style of thinking
and working, to their intimate epistemology. Our respondents do not experience
digital workflow as a technical activity, but as a subjective process of
knowledge production in which they freely combine diverse tools and resources
suited to their sensibilities and research needs. Such use of digital
technologies also emerges from their understanding of efficiency as
contextualized in scholars’ interaction with digital artifacts, not as a
presumably inherent characteristic of digital tools independent of scholars’
practices. Certain methodological and epistemological inferences that we offer
in the conclusion of this essay thus seek to inform DH theory via DH praxis, in
line with the orientation of our study.
Such focus on DH praxis was essential in phase II of the Digital Scholarly Workflow project, in which we partnered with the
Zotero software (see: https://www.zotero.org) development team from George Mason University
to enhance Zotero based on our research findings. Two software optimizations
were developed and launched, centered on discovery, organization, and archiving
in the research workflow. A Really Simple Syndication (RSS) feed reader was
introduced in Zotero that allowed researchers to receive notifications from
their favorite journals and other publishers as new publications appear. A
Zotero My Publications workflow was also created,
offering researchers the capability to self-archive their work. These items
could then be automatically deposited into a Hydra-based institutional
repository via a new tool, Arkivo, developed for the project (see: https://github.com/zotero/arkivo-sufia). The second phase of the
Digital Scholarly Workflow project also
included usability testing of these optimizations, indicating positive findings
towards centering specific research activities within the Zotero interface for
greater workflow productivity and cohesiveness (see: ).
We start this essay with a summary of the Digital Scholarly
Workflow project methodology, and then turn to presenting the
results gathered through contextual inquiries. Specifically, we focus on results
related to the research activities of finding, organizing, and storing digital
research data and materials, which were the focal point of phase II of our
project. The initial project phase, which analyzed scholars’ information
behavior at all stages of the research lifecycle, showed that the important
links and mutual influences among these research activities are not always fully
recognized, so, in phase II, we sought to contribute to filling in those
analytical gaps. The paper concludes with the vision of scholars as bricoleurs,
and with suggestions on how to approach digital scholarship in the humanities
based on ethnographic understanding of digital workflows in context.
Project methodology
Phase I (2012-2014) of the Digital Scholarly
Workflow project explored the digital research workflows of the Penn
State faculty across the sciences, social sciences, and humanities, and it
included a web survey (N=196) and in-person ethnographic interviews (N=23). The
quantitative orientation of the web survey enabled us to compare and contrast
what scholars are doing in their digital workflows, while the
qualitative character of the in-depth interviews facilitated understanding of
why scholars carry out their workflows in particular ways.
Building on those results related to the what and why of digital
workflows, phase II of the project (2014-2016) focused on humanities scholars
and on understanding a twofold how – how humanists’ carry out their
workflows in practice, and how software solutions can enhance or impede those
practices. As mentioned in the previous section, we observed humanists’ use of
digital research tools in situ through a series
of contextual inquiry sessions, with the goal of answering the first
how, and we then partnered with the Zotero team to address the
second how by enhancing the Zotero software. Our Zotero enhancement
activities are addressed in detail in separate articles (see: ; (#cahoy2018)), while this paper
focuses on the results of the contextual inquiry sessions completed in the Fall
of 2016.
Contextual inquiry is a qualitative method that combines traditional
ethnographic techniques into a potent heuristic for gathering data about
contextualized and naturally-occurring activities (see: ; (#bednar2014)). Context refers to
a set of interconnected conditions in which analyzed activities take place, and
which motivate and shape those activities. In this study, contextual inquiry
concentrated on the digital workflows of eight humanities scholars in the course
of their daily research. This small-scale observational study thus supplemented
findings from our preceding larger and medium-scale studies completed in phase
I, allowing us to develop deeper qualitative understanding of how humanists’
research practices change in the encounter with digital technologies. Scholars
consulted in the contextual inquiries included four male and four female
participants, most of whom (6) were tenured professors. More than half of the
contextual inquiry sessions (5) were conducted at scholars’ offices and on
average lasted 90 minutes. Three sessions took place at the University
library.

Two researchers attended each of the sessions and used the same observational
guide, which provided for the consistency and easier standardization of research
notes and findings. These researchers quietly sat aside observing study
participants as they carried out their work, interrupting only if a
clarification was needed, and taking detailed notes of the observed workflows.
We did not assign any tasks to the participants, but asked them instead to
engage in the information-based research activities they planned for the day,
and to guide us through those activities by thinking aloud about why they are
doing what they are doing. The respondents’ verbal accounts were audio-recorded
and later professionally transcribed. Both the session transcripts and the
researchers’ notes were coded for activities, patterns, themes, and respondents’
experiences in interacting with digital tools. All information that could have
been identified with individual study participants remained confidential. The
quotations used in this text are thus presented through pseudonyms, and some of
the quotations have been slightly edited for privacy, clarity, and length. In
the following, we first discuss how our respondents search for research data and
materials, and we then turn to reviewing their activities related to storing and
organizing those materials.
Searching for research data and materials
When searching for research data and materials, humanities scholars consult a
web of resources, both electronic and paper-based. This study focuses on
electronic resources for two reasons. First, the study explored
digital workflows, that is, the integration of digital tools
and resources into humanists’ practice. Second, contextual inquiry allowed
direct observation of scholars’ use of online resources, while the information
on their use of libraries, archives, and other physical collections could have
been inferred only indirectly, through the respondents’ accounts.
Contextual inquiry showed that humanists predominantly use online resources to
search for secondary sources, such as journal articles and books. In
discovery search, they frequently use commercial search engines like Google and
Google Scholar, while library portals and academic databases mostly serve for
known item search and access. Contextual inquiry thus confirmed the findings of
phase I of our project and other relevant studies (see: ; (#antonijevi); ; (#asher2013)). Humanists also
explore more specialized online resources, such as movie databases and newspaper
online archives, as well as their personal collections of digital and/or
digitized materials. Among our respondents, the search for primary sources
largely takes place offline, in archival and other physical collections, and to
digitize material typically means to take a digital
photo of an archival document and to store it as a JPEG file for further use.
Such on-site digitized primary materials grow over time into humanists’ rich
personal collections, becoming a vital information resource these scholars
regularly access in their research.
For instance, in one of the contextual inquiry sessions, Audrey, a professor of
history, searched for literature on an event that took place in 1916, and for
which she had only partial information. Audrey’s search starts with her personal
collection of notes written in Word and stored on the internal hard drive. She
uses a Word search function that queries the folder for a supposed event name,
but this search yields no result. Audrey then switches to her browser and the
online search. She logs on to the Penn State library and enters a search
phrase composed of three descriptors into the discovery search interface,
LionSearch. This attempt does not yield any results either. Okay, no problem, I’m going to go to some of my favorite
databases, Audrey says optimistically, and, using the same search
phrase, she continues her search in the Historical
Abstracts database.
All right, I need another field. It
happened in Rome, she comments still optimistically, and expands her
search with one more field, which reads Rome. Still nothing. Seriously?!, Audrey exclaims with
annoyance. All right, let me just do
war council, something more specific, she says with
reasserted optimism, and changes her search phrase accordingly. Failure again.
Really?!, Audrey laments in
shock. I would have thought it was more
important. Audrey then reaches to her bookshelf and grabs a book.
She reads through a few pages, trying to find any additional information that
could help her search. Nothing. But Audrey is not ready to give up yet.
She returns to her library search and adds November as one more search
field, trying to make her query as precise as possible. No results. Still,
Audrey does not give up, and, instead of adding one more search term, she
decides to change her search phrase. She creates a new search phrase, again
composed of three descriptors as the possible event name. Nope. All right, strange, Audrey says quietly,
confident that any further search would be pointless. You would think someone must have written an article about
this. It was the time that the different allies got together and hammered
out a strategy …, she continues murmuring, but discontinues her
library search. Instead, Audrey decides to try her luck with Google Search. She
enters the search phrase and the Wikipedia entry pops up right away. See, that’s the thing, Audrey
comments. One would love to use more
scholarly resources, but I just typed [the search phrase] and it’s up there
[on Wikipedia]! Sadly, Historical Abstracts was
not of too much use; the most useful one was still Wikipedia, this
historian concludes.
Dominance of non-academic search services was also observable in the case of
Theodora, an associate professor of architecture, whose search for publications
on housing in the Soviet Union started directly with Google Scholar, omitting
the library portal. Theodora starts by opening the Google Scholar page in her
web browser and entering search keywords, Soviet Housing. Before looking
at the search results, Theodora reaches to both the Zotero and Papers citation managers
and creates a new collection in each of them, which she will use to store the
materials found online. Theodora creates the collections manually, since she
does not trust the program to use its
smart features. Papers 3, a reference management software
created by Mekentosj, has a variety of automated features including
smart collections, which automatically sorts new
citations and places them in corresponding collections directed by
parameters preset by the user.

Here we see that activities of finding and storing research materials can be so
intertwined in scholars’ practices that setting up a storage folder goes in
parallel, or even precedes search. Through her workflow and narration in the
contextual inquiry, we learn that Theodora uses Zotero for saving bibliographic information about books, and Papers, for which she has paid subscription, for
saving downloaded articles. Theodora relates that she particularly appreciates
the Papers activity tab, which she calls the magic finding feature, which
recommends further readings based on the articles she stored, and also enables
her to discover tweets and other posts about those articles. Yet, despite
highlighting the magic finding feature, Theodora does not
use Papers’ built-in search tool, but carries out
her searches through Google. This also influences the way in which she imports
materials to Papers. Instead of using the built-in
import tool, Theodora downloads files from Google and saves them on her desktop,
after which she moves them to Papers. This rather
untrained use of Papers is a confirmation of
findings from the first phase of our study, which revealed that only a modest
percentage of humanists use citation managers — one third (33%) of those
surveyed — and, when they do use them, they employ them on a rather basic level
(see: (#antonijevi); (#antonijevi)).
After setting up new collections in both citation managers, Theodora returns to
the web browser and starts reading through the results that Google Scholar
yielded. This one – it’s an edited
volume, so I’ll look at that later. It is from 2005 and it’s talking about
the Soviet Union, which is a little bit weird, but it looks like it might be
OK, Theodora thinks out loud, as she looks through her search
results. She opens the link to the collection in Google Books, and saves it in
Zotero. I’m going to save it to Zotero. Since I just
created that [new collection], I’ll automatically dump it in there,
she explains. Theodora further elaborates that it is the same search process she
uses for all electronic publications. The first round is a quick run through
search materials, where she collects and saves everything that seems interesting
and relevant for the project. In the second round, she looks closely at the
saved materials and decides which of them to keep. Finally, she organizes kept
files into appropriate folders.
Such a process of collecting and managing electronic information we observed
with almost all the humanists who participated in both phases of this project.
Faced with a deluge of information available online, humanists commonly collect
everything that seems relevant, dumping it into their hard
drives, citation managers, or Dropbox folders for further examination. Detecting
such a trend, Pampson (2014) posits that scholars unsystematically gather materials, never certain when
an object might come in handy, and observes that over time folders seem to grow in number and size
geometrically generating a ceaseless flow of information . Our study implies, however, that
seemingly unsystematic scholars’ information seeking and storing behavior
actually has deeper and more systematic roots. One origin of such information
behavior relates to the essence of humanistic inquiry, which does not
necessarily constitute a search for evidence, but for multiple and often
opposing points of view. Humanists thus search for and collect materials until
they reach the point of data saturation, as one of our study participants
explained:
Peter, professor of rhetoric
What I try to do in my criticism in historical writing is to be as much
as possible dialogic, to look for competing points of view, and there’s
a point at which they [collected materials] become redundant, and then
you know you’re probably going as far as you need to go in that
direction, so it’s kind of redundancy that begins to tell you [when to
end your search].
Peter imports to Zotero all publications that look relevant for
his research, but acknowledges that it can take months before he moves from this
first round to the second round, when he goes back to Zotero and actually reads
those materials. It’s conceivable, I’d
never would come back [to Zotero ] and do much for this, but I
might, Peter specifies. He recognizes that this way of working might
be inefficient, but stresses that such inefficiencies constitute a critical part
of humanistic research. This point is important for broader understanding of
humanists’ digital workflows and their interaction with digital technologies. It
illustrates that efficiency is not a neutral or an inherent characteristic of
digital tools, resources, or workflows independent of scholars’ practices.
Rather, efficiency is construed through scholars’ interaction with digital
artifacts, as we discuss throughout the paper.
Among the respondents in this study, the only exception from the above-described
online search practice was Linda, a research associate in comparative and
international literature, whose information behavior included a careful
selection of online materials already in the first round of encountering them.
Like Theodora, Linda starts her search in Google Scholar by entering a search
phrase. Going through the list of results that her search yielded, Linda reads
the abstracts and, if an abstract seems relevant, she reads the full text
online, taking handwritten notes in her notepad. Linda explains that if she ends
up taking a lot of handwritten notes while reading articles online, she later
takes photos of those notes, emails the photos to herself, saves them as PDFs,
and then OCRs them, thus transforming them into searchable digital notes. When
she finds a text that fully meets her criteria and needs, she downloads a copy
and saves the PDF file to her Box cloud storage. From there, she moves the file
to her library in the Mendeley citation manager, but only if she decides to cite
that piece. I won’t download a PDF until
I have significant cause to, Linda explains. I have a pretty deep repository [in Mendeley], and these
are all things that I’ve read. Most of it I’ve annotated in some
way, she adds. In that way Linda avoids the deluge of downloaded
files that stay unused, and keeps her collections of digital materials focused.
This example illustrates how conceptions of efficiency are idiosyncratic and can
influence digital scholarly workflows in significant ways. For Theodora and
Peter, effectiveness implied keeping the diversity of materials available for
further analysis and for serendipitous development of their epistemological
paths. For Linda, on the contrary, efficiency implied very selective retention
and an early analytical reduction of heterogeneity in her knowledge production
process. Such differences might be a matter of personal preferences, and we
could say, following Malone’s (1983) seminal classification of storing and
sorting practices, that Theodora and Peter belong to the category of
pilers, who accumulate materials in a loosely organized manner,
while Linda belongs to the category of filers, who store and
organize their materials in a highly systematic way. We could also speculate
that such differences may result from dissimilar professional experiences. Both
Peter and Theodora are senior scholars, while Linda is a junior one, and one
might argue that senior scholars feel more comfortable dealing with
heterogeneity of analytical views than their junior colleagues. But one might
also argue that junior scholars feel more comfortable dealing with digital tools
and resources, and that the observed difference in handling electronic materials
derives from that disparity. A look at humanists’ offline search practices
supports such a possibility.
While Linda’s search behavior stands as rare among the study participants when
it comes to online search, it closely resembles the traditional archival search
behavior humanists exhibited prior to the introduction of digital technologies
into archival work. Our respondents recollect that, when collecting primary
materials in physical archives, they used to carefully read and identify
materials most pertinent to their research, systematically storing only a
handful of selected documents. The rest of important materials they would
summarize on site in written notes, which ranged from short reminders to
detailed document digests. Such a practice of managing materials recalls the
time when photocopying was one of the main ways of saving archival documents for
offsite use. It was neither cheap nor easy to handle piles of paper, so, instead
of acting as pilers who gather everything, researchers needed to
act as filers, and to strategically decide which materials were
most important to collect.
Audrey explains, for instance, that she used to take extensive notes in her past
archival work, and that those notes have been very useful for her over the
years. Now that they let you take
pictures in the archives, it’s wonderful, but at the same time you don’t
take the time to take notes anymore, this scholar observes. In
talking about her past archival work, Audrey also gives the following example:
A lot of the archives for my field used to be very badly
organized, almost like what people told me about being in Poland in 1970 -
there was a shop that had opened and there’s a queue and you just queue up
and hope that something will be for sale, whether you need it or not. It was
very much like that with archives. They gave you something. You would take
furious notes and you would also photocopy, but you might only use one or
two things. You put it aside and you think, I’m always going to be able
to use this.

Audrey explains, however, that all those materials collected in an unintended
way are in a sense all active, as
they informed her later studies, which she did not know at the time of
collecting them. In other words, archival search helped Audrey in finding
materials she was looking for, but it also served the function of making her
aware of other valuable information. Malone (Op.cit.) identifies these two
functions as finding and reminding, explaining that a
distinction between them rests on intentionality. Specifically, he posits that
if a person becomes aware of the information she was looking for, then the
finding function has been performed. If, while conducting this search, the
person becomes aware of something she was not looking for, yet found useful for
her work, then the reminding function has been served . This distinction, along with Audrey’s explanation and
experience, resonates with Peter’s previously cited description of his
inefficient search process, demonstrating again that
humanists’ outwardly inefficient digital workflows often have deeper
epistemological roots and constitute the core of humanistic inquiry.
The above-described archival practice of photocopying selected materials and
tak[ing] furious notes of
everything else changed significantly when archives started allowing researchers
to take digital photos of materials in their collections. This change
overwhelmingly transformed scholars into pilers of hundreds,
sometime even thousands of materials, significantly disrupting their workflows,
as we describe and discuss in more detail in the following section.
Storing and organizing research data and materials
Both phases of our study showed that humanists largely use internal computer
hard drives and cloud-based services, such as Dropbox and Box, to store research
data and materials, while only a handful use the Penn State institutional
repository, ScholarSphere; this finding is consistent with other studies of
institutional repositories use (see: (#davis2007); . The most common way in which our respondents
organize stored research materials is according to the research project. A
typical project folder, whether on a local hard-drive or in Dropbox, is an
over-reaching compartment that breaks down into two main sub-folders, one for
primary and one for secondary sources. Primary sources mainly consist of
archival documents captured as JPEG files, and they are commonly titled
according to the archive and/or archival box from which they originated.
Secondary sources, such as PDF files of journal articles and books, are stored
in a different subfolder. These subfolders further branch into sub-subfolders
organized around the subject they cover (a specific topic, period of time,
person), the source from which they originated (a physical archive, colleagues,
other projects), or in line with the project/workflow phase to which they are
related (phase I,
articles to read,
annotated).
In one of the contextual inquiry sessions we observed, Fred, a historian of
science, was organizing and handling materials related to his project on the
history of Unidentified Flying Object (UFO) research. The organizational
structure of his project materials was the following:
the overall project folder titled UFO project;
a subfolder containing primary sources — thousands of digital photos
of archival materials he photographed in various archives. Those
materials are further organized into sub-subfolders classified and named
after the corresponding archival boxes from which they came, and/or
according to a specific research topic they cover;
a subfolder containing secondary materials, such as PDF files of
articles related to the UFO research. Those materials are classified
into sub-subfolders and named according to a decade when they were
written — 1950s, 1960s, and so on.

In naming classification units such as folders and subfolders, Fred’s practice
mostly meets recommended file-naming conventions; he uses short and descriptive
titles, includes the project name in the file name, and so on. But the situation
changes when it comes to individual JPEG files of archival materials. Those
files all retain numeric, automatically generated file names, without
indications about the content of the file. Such a practice mainly stems from the
quantity of JPEG files Fred is managing. He points out that ever since digital
photographing became allowed in the archives, he decided to get the scale of the digitization, so he took
nearly 4,000 photos in one archive alone. Renaming thousands of JPEG files would
require substantial time and effort, including more careful reading of the
archival documents, so that assigned file-names could reflect their content and
enable more efficient browsing and retrieval. Fred, however, quickly reads
archival materials while on site and photographs everything that seems relevant
for his research. Acting as a piler, Fred thus amasses thousands of
digital JPEG files that are difficult to organize, rename, search, and retrieve.
Fred first organizes all of the digital materials on his desktop, saving them
both on the internal hard drive and in a Dropbox folder. At the end of the day
he transfers thus organized materials to an external hard disk. Such a
systematic practice of daily backup was rare among the humanities participating
in both phases of our study, who generally reported important data loss (see:
(#antonijevi); (#antonijevi)). Fred
stresses that he had suffered a critical system failure and loss of digital
materials a few years ago, so he switched to a daily backup routine ever since.
Another professor of history, Connor, describes an experience similar to Fred’s,
which however quickly developed into a notably different workflow in managing
digital archival materials. When digital photographing became permissible in
archives, Connor used to be a piler like Fred and to take photos of everything
that seemed relevant, saving those materials as JPEG files. After a while, he
realized that he would return from the archive with an overload of digital
photos that required a lot of storage space, were unsearchable, and for which he
often could not recall contextual meaning. Connor thus decided to change his
archival workflow. Instead of just snapping photos, he now first reads archival
materials at the level needed to determine whether they represent those critical
materials that should be saved in the digital form. Resembling Linda’s strategy
described in the previous section — to save only those secondary sources that
she will cite — Connor comparably stores as JPEG files only those materials that
he deems as something he will use and cite in his work. All other relevant
archival materials he summarizes on site in short notes, usually a paragraph
long, and types as Word files. This
condenses everything really, really small, Connor says of his work
process, commending the ability to recognize key documents that should be
stored, and to efficiently summarize all other relevant materials: What I have here, for all of that [archival] material, are six
pages. It doesn’t exhaust everything. But when I go back to this stuff, I
tell myself that former me, back in the fall [when he was doing research in
the archive] was smart. I knew what I was doing. I knew exactly what kinds
of things were critical and important and what things weren’t.

The observed differences between Connor and Fred’s archival practices bring us
back to the question of what constitutes efficiency in humanists’ digital
workflows. Like Connor, Fred also recognizes that JPEG files of archival
materials do not allow for easy browsing, retrieval, and annotation, but points
out that this inefficiency actually benefits his work. It compels him to
describe both the data and his ideas about the data in consolidated and focused
summaries that he types as Word documents: The only way I’ve
annotated them [JPEG files] is in this separate [Word] file here. As I would
go through [JPEG files], I would keep a paper where I would take my notes on
it with ideas. These are going to be things that I want to come back to,
themes that I’m noticing in the digital material. So when I want to start to
research, I’ll look at this stuff here to tell myself what is it I’m looking
for, what is it I want to do, and that becomes a major theses.
[11]
For Connor, efficiency means promptly identifying key archival documents that
should be photographed and stored, thus eliminating the encumbrance of digital
deluge. For Fred, in contrast, efficiency means storing thousands of JPEG files
and systematically going through them throughout the research process, slowly
discerning over time the main findings and research ideas that those materials
suggest, while writing notes that facilitate such continuous analytical
engagement with the data.
Using a method similar to Fred’s, Ellen, a historian of American literature,
stores hundreds of digitized archival materials and keeps extensive notes that
help her navigate through those materials. When working in physical archives,
Ellen uses her cell phone to take photos of archival materials, which she then
stores in cloud-based services for further use. Here I have a folder in Dropbox that says archives,
and here is the folder for Emory, Ellen says, explaining that
citation managers, such as Zotero, do not handle
archival materials well, so she lives by
Dropbox. This kind of living, however, is haunted by the specter of
data deluge. Ellen discloses, for instance, that her work at the Emory archive
yielded 189 JPEG files, which she still has not managed to process. It comes back on your phone, it’s all mixed
in with your kids’ baby pictures, Ellen complains. She specifies
that her next step will be to turn those JPEG files into PDFs for each archival
object, and to name the PDF files in a useful way that will enable her to browse
and retrieve them more efficiently. That’s how I organize my archival stuff, but it takes a lot of steps to get
there, so I have a huge backlog of stuff like that from archives that I just
haven’t dealt with, Ellen relates. Here we see yet another method of
managing digitized archival materials, by converting JPEG into PDF files.
Neither Ellen nor our other respondents use optical character recognition (OCR)
to convert their digitized archival materials into machine-readable text, which
illustrates their lack of technological savvy, discussed in more detail in our
previous work (see: (#antonijevi)).
Ellen’s work sometimes also includes materials available in digital archives,
and in such cases, when digital and traditional practices encounter each other,
deciding where to store materials and how to organize them is not always a
straightforward task. As an example, in a contextual inquiry session we observed
Ellen was dealing with an archival document that, according to her established
organizational logic, should be stored in the subfolder of primary documents.
Yet, Ellen decides to store it differently, in the subfolder for secondary
sources. She explains that she does not consider the document an archival source exactly because
she found it in the digital archive. I
didn’t go work on a collection there [in the physical archive]; I’m just
pulling it [from the web], so for me that’s a resource, not an archival
document, Ellen clarifies. This example illustrates an interesting
situation in which ontology of research objects cannot be separated from the
technological context in which they are produced, in line with Hottois’ (1984)
original understanding of technoscience. Authors such as Sinn and Soares (2014)
thus observe that humanists prefer original over digitized sources, and think
about digital materials as a way of duplicating the originals rather than as a
way of replacing them.
Jordan, a professor of history, seconds the words and workflows of both Ellen
and Fred. Jordan takes photos and scans of archival materials from physical
collections and stores those digital files on his computer. In organizing
research materials, he has a folder for every project, and then subfolders and
sub-subfolders for every subject. Jordan discloses that all those valuable and
meticulously collected materials live on his computer hard-drive and nowhere
else. He backups his materials when he gets into a panic, which happens approximately every three months.
While we observe his work in a contextual inquiry session, Jordan shows us a
Word document that he keeps as the main directory of his primary sources. This
Word document lists all the materials he had photographed or scanned in various
archives, and it helps him locate those materials on the hard drive. For instance, I have an item in here from
the archive in Germany, Jordan says, pointing at a folder on his
computer. And then I explain here what it
is that I have, Jordan clarifies further, indicating a paragraph in
his Word document. It’s all not terribly
systematic, but it’s my system and I know where everything is, he
concludes. Jordan takes extensive notes on the archival materials he is working
with, indicating what those materials contain, from which archive they come,
with what research themes and/or questions are they connected, and so on.
Jordan is one of the rare scholars consulted in our study who does not use cloud
storage in his work. Our respondents overwhelmingly select general storage
systems, such as Dropbox, over specialized tools like citation managers. One of
the main reasons is that Dropbox enables them to arrange primary and secondary
sources side by side, organizing them in an autonomous and personal way —
without imposed classification structures — and to navigate through those
materials in a way that is both coherent and personal. For scholars, storing and
organizing their research materials is not a technical or an information science
activity. It is a deeply personal intellectual pursuit of organizing their
thoughts in a way that supports a subjective process of knowledge production,
and enables them to construct digital workflows as bricolage, from a diverse
range of resources and tools, as we discuss in the concluding section of this
paper.
Discussion
Both phases of the Digital Scholarly Workflow study
indicate that digital technologies have become prevalent and transformative in
humanists’ research, challenging the view of digital scholarship as vital in the
sciences, but not in the humanities. Through an ethnographic approach and an
analytical focus on contextualized research practices, our study documented
myriad ways in which humanists actively interact with digital technologies.
Contextual inquiry conducted in the second phase confirmed the predominance of
commercial and crowdsourced resources in the discovery search, recognized in
phase I of the study, and showed that humanists mainly use online services to
find and access secondary sources, while their search for primary sources
largely takes place offline, in the archival collections.
Despite significant digitization efforts over the past few decades, archives and
other physical collections remain pivotal for humanists when it comes to finding
primary sources. Sinn and Soares (Op.cit.) observe the same trend by looking at
citations of digital archival collections compared with other sources. They
conclude that although citation of digital sources increases over time,
the impact of digital archival
collections when compared with other source materials is not significant
when judging by the frequency of citations
(#sinn2014)
.
Yet, while archives remain a vital site of humanists’ research, archival
practices significantly transform with the use of digital technologies. As we
observed throughout this paper, the main transformation emerges from the use of
digital cameras and humanists’ on-site digitization of archival materials. All
of our respondents whose research includes archival work reported taking digital
photos of primary sources and storing them for further use. Rutner and Schonfeld
(2012) identified the same trend among their respondents, arguing that the
widespread use of digital cameras in archives
is perhaps the single most
significant shift in research practices among historians, and one with
as-yet largely unrecognized implications for the work of historical
research and its support
(#rutner2012)
.
Through such practices humanists build rich personal collections of digitized
primary sources, which become one of the central information resources in their
work. Scholars consulted in both phases of our study stressed that such personal
digital collections provided them with desired work mobility and an
uninterrupted access to research data and materials. In parallel, however, such
collections confronted them with the problem of data deluge, for which our
respondents rarely had efficient management strategies.
The problem of data deluge appeared as a consistent challenge with both primary
and secondary sources. As discussed in the previous section, humanists often
download from the web and save all secondary sources that seem relevant for
their work, but it sometimes takes months before they actually return to those
materials. By simply dumping downloaded files into hard-drive or cloud storage
folders, scholars often forget about those materials and end up investing time
in the same search process again. A further consequence is that their already
cluttered storage folders become even messier, as they save duplicate copies of
files downloaded in the previous search. Some of our respondents thus point out
that they had a complete breakdown of organizational system with a shift away
from paper copies, and needed to adjust their organizational system to digital
sources. An exception are scholars like Linda, who carefully review research
materials before deciding to download and store them, as well as scholars like
Theodora, who use citation managers that detect duplicate files.
When it comes to primary sources, humanists traditionally managed archival
materials by collecting and storing a number of most important documents, while
they summarized other relevant materials in extensive research notes. This
established method of managing primary sources has been disrupted with the
adoption of digital cameras, as we discussed in previous sections. It appears
that, as a result of this change, humanists’ online practices have been
transposed to the sphere of physical archives, bringing hastier digital workflow
to traditionally more methodical archival work. Humanists now commonly handle
archival materials in the same way as they handle online sources — quickly
collect everything that seems relevant, store it, and examine later.
Humanists’ archival work thus develops into collection missions, as Rutner and Schonfeld
illustratively dub it, where scholars spend most of onsite time photographing
archival materials (#rutner2012). As a result, they
regularly return from archives with hundreds, in some cases even thousands of
digitally captured materials, which confront them with challenges of storing,
searching, annotating, and retrieving those materials. Scholars’ personal
digital collections thus need to be a more visible point of analytical
attention, particularly with regard to securely storing those materials and
managing them in ways that enable easy retrieval and better workflow integration
across tools and data formats.
Namely, the humanists in our study commonly use more than one software solution
in their research workflow. Trace and Karadkar (2016) noted similar practices
among the humanists they studied, and indicated support for a more integrated
solution with fewer moving parts and more connected activities. Literature on
personal information management has also discussed the fragmentation problem
within an individual workflow ((#al); ; (#jones2011)
fragmentation of information into
different collections forces a person who is working on a single project
to store and retrieve items from different locations with no structural
connection between them
(#bergman2007)
. In this study, we saw that all of the respondents search in one tool,
then deposit in another (or in multiple cases, more than one place), and this
disconnect between search and storage is ripe with possible complications,
including loss of information. As mentioned in the Introduction, humanists
consulted in our study suffered higher data loss than their colleagues in the
sciences.
The importance of Microsoft Word as a storage and annotation tool emerged among
our participants in that regard. Word is used to store (and then cut and paste
into documents) citations and summaries of archival materials; Connor, Fred, and
Ellen demonstrate this workflow in action. All of these scholars used Word in
isolation as a blank slate document where they could create
lists or libraries of information that best suit their individual needs.
With this adoption of Microsoft Word in mind, we wonder if it would be useful to
build connections into Word that bring other services to the user in this
environment (such as article discovery or more facilitated and anticipatory
citation management). A number of projects have similarly focused on bringing
increased information services into the Word processing environment (; (#dickinson2009); ; (#green2009); ; (#sefton2009)). These
initiatives, all conducted between 2000-2010, saw the value of semantic data
within Word documents for researchers. An overall goal of most of these projects
was simply to combine services and collaboration to provide greater
opportunities for researchers. While the projects have not continued, the need
persists for better integration of a range of services within the word
processing environment, based on empirically observed research practices.
This understanding of research practices mandates that future DH tools designed
for the scholarly workflow must account for humanists' empirically observed
needs, which are sometimes slow to change. For instance, we recently worked with
researchers at DePaul University to replicate our 2012 Digital Scholarly Workflow study among their faculty. Five years
after our original study, the findings were strikingly similar. Humanists
continue to struggle with inefficient digital workflows, primarily with tools
that have been in use for a decade or more, and which do not successfully
support seamless workflows across information sources.
Understanding similarities and differences in humanists’ interaction with
diverse information sources — digital and analog, institutional and
crowdsourced, academic and commercial, public and personal — will facilitate the
development of digital tools and methods that support uninterrupted search,
storing, and management across sources, computer programs, and data formats.
Such tools are needed to support a seamless manner in which humanists combine
research activities spanning a variety of digital and analog sources and
tools. Tools such as Tropy (https://tropy.org/) are a positive step in that direction, though
they have a lot of space for improvement. For instance, it is essential for
such tools to have a mobile application allowing scholars to manage
photographed archival materials on site, to enable easy upload and
synchronization with cloud-based services, to provide detection of duplicate
files, and so on. In this study, we saw Audrey who started her search
by using the Word search function to query a folder with her notes, switched to
online search in the Penn State library portal, then moved from the digital to
the analog realm reading through her books, and finally resolved her search
effort through the use of Google and Wikipedia. We also observed Linda who takes
handwritten notes in her notepad while reading articles online, then takes
photos of those notes and emails the photos to herself, saves them as PDFs, and
finally OCRs them, thus transforming her handwritten notes into searchable
digital notes.
These examples show that in humanists’ workflows digital and analog tools and
resources do not necessarily replace one another or vie for the dominant
position. They rather supplement each other in an interconnected, hybrid, and
bricolage manner that comes to our respondents as an organic manifestation of
their work. To understand this better, it is useful to return to the view of
scholars as bricoleurs, which we presented in the Introduction of this essay,
and to which we return in the next and concluding section of this essay.
Conclusion
The view of scholars as bricoleurs draws on Lévi-Strauss’s (Op.cit.) inquiry
into bricolage as situated practice and its specific, unscripted approach to
technology illustrated in the comparison between engineers and bricoleurs.
Although the figures of bricoleur and engineer are idealized — as is the
difference between them — they point to an important difference in engaging with
technology and knowledge production. While the engineer uses specialized tools
adjusting tasks to the availability of those tools and striving for perfection,
the bricoleur takes the opposite route and adjusts non-specialized tools to a
variety of tasks, tolerating imperfection. The bricoleur achieves that by
combining available tools and resources into an improvised aggregate adjusted to
his or her needs.
Bricolage is thus a creative act of recombining elements — tools, genes,
cultural forms, and so on — in individualized and unscripted ways. Drawing on
Lévi-Strauss, Jacob (1977) points out that to create is to recombine, and offers the
example of natural selection:
The action of natural selection has
often been compared to that of engineers. This, however, does not seem
to be a suitable comparison. First, because in contrast to what occurs
in evolution, the engineer works according to a preconceived plan. …
Second, because… to make a new product he [the engineer] has at his
disposal both material specially prepared to that end and machines
designed solely for that task. Finally, because the objects produced by
the engineer, at least by the good engineer, approach the level of
perfection made possible by the technology of the time. In contrast,
evolution is far from perfection. … It works like a tinkerer — a
tinkerer who does not know exactly what he is going to produce but uses
whatever he finds around him. … The tinkerer gives his materials
unexpected functions to produce a new object. From an old bicycle wheel,
he makes a roulette; from a broken chair the cabinet of a radio.
Similarly evolution makes a wing from a leg or a part of an ear from a
piece of jaw.
(#jacob1977)

Turkle and Papert (1990) similarly draw on Lévi-Strauss to talk about
hard and soft approaches to
programming as two ways of engaging with technology and knowledge production.
They interpret these two approaches as gendered, and, more relevant for our
discussion, as differently scripted. While hard corresponds
to highly scripted and canonical approach, soft is
eminently creative, non-canonical, and personal. Turkle and Papert see computers
as a medium for expression of personal styles. Accordingly, they interpret
different styles of engaging with computers as insights into various styles of
thought, which they term epistemological pluralism. Hard and soft are more than different approaches to
computation, the authors explain.
The phrase epistemological
pluralism (rather than, for example, computational
pluralism) underscores the generality of the issues. The
computer forces general questions about intellectual style to reveal an
everyday face
(#turkle1990)
To illustrate such revealing of intellectual styles, the authors provide
examples of two Harvard students dissatisfied with the way programming is taught
and practiced — namely, as a prescribed, highly scripted, and blackboxed
activity. One of the students wants instead to code in a more flexible and
creative manner and to
manipulate computer language the
way she works with words when she writes poems
(#turkle1990)
. Her colleague, a pianist, similarly discloses that although she had
learned the required — scripted and canonical — approach to programming, she
enjoys programming in a more creative way, treating it as musical phrases .
Humanists consulted in this study similarly engage with digital tools and
resources in a non-canonical, highly personal way, which corresponds to their
style of thinking and working, to their intimate epistemology. We saw in the
previous sections that humanists do not experience their digital workflows as a
technical or an information science activity. Instead, it is a subjective
process of knowledge production in which they construct digital workflows from a
diverse range of tools and resources suited to their preferences, sensibilities,
and research needs. As one of us showed in the previous research , humanists’ uptake of digital tools often
emerges spontaneously, based on specific research or teaching needs. Once so
adopted, digital technologies continue to interact with scholars’ workflows
quietly, usually remaining outside the purview of digital humanities. It is,
however, critically important for both DH theory and practice to recognize and
engage this variety of voices of non-canonical technology use, which holds the promise of catalyzing
change, as Turkle and Papert point out .
One of such changes includes recognizing contextualized empirical studies of
scholars’ engagement with technology as the foundation for the development of
digital research tools. Namely, the bricolage way of working observed in this
study often comes from necessity, that is, from the lack of adequate tools and
resources. When our respondents use cell phone cameras to digitize archival
materials on site, this application of an available and simple technological
solution is a response to the lack of specialized tools and digitized primary
sources. Similarly, respondents’ extensive Word annotations of archival
materials alleviate the pain of managing impromptu digitized sources difficult
to search, annotate, and retrieve.
The bricolage way of working thus often stems from the failure to provide
digital tools and resources that meaningfully improve scholarly practices and
inspire wider uptake. In both phases of the Digital
Scholarly Workflow project humanists emphasized that their adoption
of digital tools primarily depends on the tool’s capacity to meet their research
needs. As long as a simple tool like Word or Dropbox successfully supports their
work, scholars do not tend to replace it with a novel or more sophisticated
tool. Sufficient, not efficient is the guiding motto of their selection
and adoption of digital tools and resources.
As we discussed throughout the paper, efficiency cannot be qualified as a
neutral or inherent characteristic of digital tools independent of scholars’
practices. It is scholars’ interaction with digital artifacts that determines
what constitutes efficiency of a tool in the context of a scholar’s workflow. As
Pinch and Bijker (1987) point out, the same technological artifact can be
attributed with very different meanings and interpretations depending on the
context of use and particular understanding of those artifacts. Law (2003)
similarly recognizes that technological imperfections and
unruly practices in technology use are not only
unavoidable, but also beneficial insomuch that they become integrated into a
routine that enables uninterrupted functioning.
It is through this analytical lens that we can understand
inefficient and unruly bricolage
practices observed in this study. Like bricoleurs in Lévi-Strauss’s original
account, humanists are constructing their digital workflow with an orientation
on creativity and interpretation rather than on efficiency. Embracing humanities
researchers as bricoleurs will thus enable us to prevent the quest for
computational efficiency from overshadowing the quest for humanistic
understanding.


Al-Omar, M.,Cox, A.
(2013). Finders, Keepers, Losers, Seekers: A Study of
Academics' Research-Related Personal Information Collections.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 8016 LNCS (PART
1), 169–176. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-39209-2-20
Antonijević, S. (2015).
Amongst Digital Humanists: An ethnographic study of
digital knowledge production. London, New York: Palgrave Macmillan
Antonijević, S.,
and Cahoy, E. (2016). Developing Research Tools via Voices
from the Field.
DH+LIB Special Issue, July 2016; retrieved from:
http://acrl.ala.org/dh/2016/07/29/developing-research-tools-via-voices-from-the-field/
Antonijević, S.
and Cahoy, E. (2014). Personal Library Curation: An
Ethnographic Study of Scholars’ Information Practices.
Portal: Libraries and the Academy, Vol. 14, No 2:
287–306
Asher, A.D.,
Duke,M.L., and Wilson, S. (2013). Paths of Discovery:
Comparing the Search Effectiveness of EBSCO Discovery Service, Summon,
Google Scholar, and Conventional Library Resources.
College and Research Libraries: 464-488; retrieved
from: http://crl.acrl.org/content/74/5/464.full.pdf

Baker, T. and Neslon, R.E.
(2005). Creating Something from Nothing: Resource
Construction through Entrepreneurial Bricolage.
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 50, No. 3:
329-366
Bednar, P. and Welch, C.E.
(2014). Contextual inquiry and socio-technical
practice.
Kybernetes, Vol. 43 Issue: 9/10: 310-1318;
retrieved from:
https://doi.org/10.1108/K-07-2014-0156 .
Bergman,
O., Beyth-marom, R.,Nachmias, R. (2007). The
User-Subjective Approach to Personal Information Management Systems Design:
Evidence and Implementations.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology. Vol. 59, No. 2: 235-246
doi:10.1002/asi.20738
Bijker, W.E.,
Hughes, T.P., and Pinch, T. (2012/1987). The Social
Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions in the Sociology and
History of Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Broom, A. (2009). Intuition, Subjectivity, and Le Bricoleur: Cancer Patients’ Accounts of
Negotiating a Plurality of Therapeutic Options.
Qualitative Health Research, Vol. 19, No. 8:
1050-1059.
Cahoy, E. S. (2018). Leave the Browser Behind: Placing Discovery Within the User's
Workflow.
LIBER Quarterly, Vol. 28, Issue No. 1: 1–19.
http://doi.org/10.18352/lq.10221
Carr, L., Miles-Board, T., Woukeu,
A., Wills, G.,Hall, W. (2004). The Case for Explicit
Knowledge in Documents.
Proceedings of the 2004 ACM symposium on Document
engineering - DocEng '04: 90-98.
Carstensen, M.B. (2011).
Paradigm man vs. the bricoleur: Bricolage as an
alternative vision of agency in ideational change.
European Political Science Review, 3(1): 147-167
Chun, W.H.K. and Rhody, L.M.
(2014). Working the Digital Humanities: Uncovering Shadows
between the Dark and the Light.
differences, Vol.25, No 1: 1-25.
Conville, R.L. (1997). Between Spearheads: Bricolage and Relationships.
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, Vol.
14, No 3: 373-386.
Craciun, M. (2013). Moral bricolage and immigrant identification: The case of
Romanian Americans.
Ethnic and Racial Studies, Vol. 36, No. 5: 729-746.
Cullen, R. and Chawner, B.
(2010). Institutional repositories: assessing their value
to the academic community.
Performance Measurment and Metrics, 11(2): 131-14
Davis, P.M. and Connolly,
M.J.L. (2007). Institutional Repositories: Evaluating the
Reasons for Non-use of Cornell University's Installation of DSpace.
D-Lib Magazine, 13 (3/4); retrieved from: http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march07/davis/03davis.html

Denzin, N.K. and Lincoln,
Y.A., Eds. (2000). Handbook of Qualitative
Research. Thousands Oaks, CA, London, UK: Sage Publications.
Derrida, J. (1997/1967). Of Gramatology. Baltimore, MA: John Hopkins University
Press.
Deuze, M. (2006). Participation, Remediation, Bricolage: Considering Principal Components of
a Digital Culture.
The Information Society, Vol. 22, No 2: 63-75.
Dickinson, D. and
Sefton, P. (2009). Creating an eResearch Desktop for the
Humanities. 3rd eResearch Australasia Conference, Sydney, Australia.
Fernicola, P. F. (2009). Incorporating Semantics and Metadata as Part of the Article
Authoring Process. Paper presented at the ELPUB: Rethinking
Electronic Publishing: Innovation in Communication Paradigms and Technologies -
Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Electronic Publishing.
Milano, Italy. 367-279.
Freund, L. (2015). Contextualizing the information-seeking behavior of software
engineers.
Journal of the Association for Information Science and
Technology. Vol. 66, No. 8: 1594-1605.
Gobbi, M. (2004). Nursing practice as bricoleur activity: a concept explored.
Nursing Inquiry, Vol. 12, No. 2: 117-125.
Graham, S. (2002). Historians and electronic resources: Patterns and use.
Journal of the Association for History and
Computing, 5(2); retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/2027/spo.3310410.0005.201

Green, R.,Awre, C.
(2009). Towards a Repository-Enabled Scholar's Workbench:
RepoMMan, REMAP and Hydra.
D-Lib Magazine, Vol. 15, No. 5-6: 1-9.
doi:10.1045/may2009-green
Holtzblatt, K. and
Jones, S. (1993). Contextual Inquiry: A Participatory
Technique for System Design. In: Schuler, D. and Namioka, A. (Eds.),
Participatory Design: Principles and Practices.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum: 177-210
Hottois, G. (1984). Le signe et la technique. La philosophie à l’épreuve de la
technique. Paris: Aubier.
Jacob, F. (1977). Evolution and Tinkering.
Science, Vol. 196, No. 4295: 1161-1166.
Johnson, C. (2012). Bricoleur and Bricolage: From Metaphor to Universal
Concept.
Paragraph, Vol. 35, No. 3: 355–372.
Jones, W.,Anderson,
K. M. (2011). Many Views, Many Modes, Many Tools... One
Structure: Towards a Non-Disruptive Integration of Personal
Information. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia: 113-122.
Kincheloe, J.L. (2001). Describing the Bricolage: Conceptualizing a New Rigor in
Qualitative Research.
Qualitative Inquiry, Vol. 7, No. 6: 679-692.
Kirschenbaum, M. (2014).
What Is Digital Humanities, and Why Are They
Saying Such Terrible Things about It?
differences, Vol. 25, No. 1; retrieved from: http://eadh.org/sites/default/files/dhterriblethingskirschenbaum.pdf

Liu, A. (2009). Digital
Humanities and Academic Change.
English Language and Notes, Vol. 47: 17-35.
Law, J. (2003). Ladbroke Grove, Or How to Think about Failing Systems. Centre for
Science Studies, Lancaster University; retrieved from http://www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/sociology/papers/Law-Ladbroke-Grove-Failing-Systems.pdf

Lévi-Strauss, C.
(1966). The Savage Mind. Chicago, IL: The
University of Chicago Press.
Murray-Rust, P.,
Rzepa, H. S. (2004). The Next Big Thing : From
Hypermedia to Datuments.
Journal of Digital Information. Vol. 5, No. 1: 1-8.
Nicholas, D., Rowlands, I.,
Williams, P., Brown, D. and Clark D. (2011). E-journals:
their use, value and impact – final report.
Research Information Network, London; retrieved
from http://www.rin.ac.uk/system/files/attachments/E-journals-report.pdf

Malone, T. W. (1983). How do people organize their desks: implications for the
design of office information-systems.
ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems, 1:
99-112.
Papson, S. (2013). Scholars, intellectuals, and bricoleurs.
Arts and Humanities in Higher Education, Vol. 13,
No. 4: 377-394.
Pinar, W.F. (2001). The Researcher as Bricoleur: The Teacher as Public Intellectual.
Qualitative Inquiry, Vol. 7, No. 6: 696-700.
Pinch, T. and Bijker, W.
(1987). The social construction of facts and artifacts: Or
how the sociology of science and the sociology of technology might benefit
each other. In: Biker et. al. (Eds.), The
Social Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions in the
Sociology and History of Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press (pp.
17-50).
Reilly, M.A. (2011). Opening Spaces of Possibility: The Teacher as
Bricoleur.
Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, Vol. 52,
No. 5: 376-384.
Rutner, J., and
Schonfeld, R.C. (2012). Supporting the Changing Research
Practices of Historians.
ITHAKA S+R; retrieved from: http://www.sr.ithaka.org/wp-content/mig/reports/supporting-the-changing-research-practices-of-historians.pdf

Schnelker, D.L. (2006). The Student-as-Bricoleur: Making Sense of Research
Paradigms.
TeachingTeacher Education: An International Journal
of Research and Studies, Nol. 22, No. 1: 42-57.
Schonfeld, R. C. (2015). Meeting Researchers Where They Start : Streamlining Access to
Scholarly Resources; retrieved from: https://doi.org/10.18665/sr.241038

Sefton, P., Barnes, I., Ward,
R. and Downing, J. (2009). Embedding metadata and other
semantics in word processing documents.
International Journal of Digital Curation, Vol. 4
No. 2: 93–106. doi:10.2218/ijdc.v4i2.96.
Sinn, D. (2012). Impact of digital archival collections on historical research.
Journal of American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 63(8): 1521–1537.
Sinn, D. and Soares, N. (2014).
Historians' use of digital archival collections: The
web, historical scholarship, and archival research.
Journal of the Association for Information Science and
Technology, Vol. 69, No. 9: 1794–1809.
Svensson, P. (2010). The Landscape of Digital Humanities.
Digital Humanities Quarterly, Vol. 4, No.1;
retrieved from: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/1/000080/000080.html

Thaller, M. (2012). Controversies around the Digital Humanities: An
Agenda.
Historical Social Research, Vol. 37, No. 3: 7-23.
Trace, C. B.,
Karadkar, U. P. (2016). Information Management in the
Humanities: Scholarly Processes, Tools, and the Construction of Personal
Collections.
Journal of the Association for Information Science and
Technology, Vol. 68, No. 2. 491-507.
Turkle, S. and Papert, S.
(1990). Epistemological Pluralism and the Revaluation of
the Concrete. Available at: http://web.media.mit.edu/~ascii/papers/turkle_papert_1990.pdf.
Wineburg, S. (2001). Historical Thinking and Other Unnatural Acts: Charting the
Future of Teaching the Past. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University
Press.

