Circling around texts and language: towards
                        pragmatic modelling in Digital Humanities
Arianna Ciula
Cristina Marras
17 June 2016

Circling around texts and language: towards pragmatic
modelling in Digital Humanities

1. Introduction
DH or humanities computing in its former vest (#schreibman2004) is
being institutionalized and is an example of how cross-border fertilisation,
namely interdisciplinarity, is possible (#mccarty2016)
(#marras2012). DH scholars and professionals are making use of a
blended style reflected both in their language, by
adopting expressions to account for new scenarios, and in their research and
teaching approaches, often integrating computational methods and terminologies
with modes of discourse associated with more established
scholarship in the humanities (#marras2013)
(#flanders2009). DH is surely a field in rapid evolution, where
open questions are numerous and self-reflexivity is not new (see for example
(#gold2012)). Modelling is widely agreed to be a central
activity of DH; as the discipline is institutionalised to a greater degree, new
opportunities and challenges are being opened up, not least to understand the
act of modelling far better than we have done in the past. In particular, the
sharing of empirical practices and methodologies across borders makes DH
somewhat comparable to the techno-sciences; For an overview of models in
science see in particular (#frigg2012). For an in depth
discussion and examples of the use of analogical modelling in science, see
(#shelley2003)
(#skousen2002). For an overview on modelling in information
science see (#mahr2009). Note that we use the term
techno-sciences, as McCarty does in his work, to be inclusive towards
engineering and to recognise the profound role of computing in contemporary
science. it also anchors humanities scholarship to a practical
dimension that renews its 15th-century roots of empirical studia humanitatis. Considered within an historical
perspective, empirical approaches in humanities research have an
independence to claim:
Sadly modern humanists often
believe that they are moving towards science when they use an
empirical approach in studying texts, art, music, or the past. They
are mistaken. Scholars using empirical methods are returning to
their roots in the 15th-century studia
humanitatis when the empirical approach was invented —
and not since disappeared.
(#bod2014)
This paper will make a contribution to this discussion by
asking the following questions: other scholarship in the humanities and
techno-sciences has passed/passes via the experimental and the formal; in what
way is the experimental and the formal done in DH different and similar? Where
do DH modellers position their models in the polarity between texts/objects and
theory/practice? Is modelling in computing going to lift our way of seeing, and
therefore thinking, to another level of analysis?
To address these questions our argument will engage with two interrelated
concepts:
text: dynamic cultural objects (material documents as well as
immaterial objects) Modelling of texts intended in this way makes
it akin to what in the philosophical debate is described as
fictional models (we will return to this under section 3).
contingent to the contexts of production and reading, expressed in a
wide range of manifestations from linear to discontinuous narrative,
from manuscripts to printed editions, encompassing hybrid
modalities;
modelling: a DH-specific research and teaching activity, but
also connected to multifaceted conceptualisations of model building as
used and understood by other disciplines and practices.
Modelling in DH (#mccarty2005)
(#jannidis2013)
(#flanders2015) is informed by modelling as rooted in computer
sciences and therefore in mathematical reasoning. It is also directly
interconnected with work on texts (#buzzetti2002), the privileged
objects of humanities research. Here the perspectives that it can grant are
multifaceted and not limited to ways of seeing patterns of similarity across
them (#eide2015). It should be specified that it is modelling
activities that we are focusing on here, rather than the models
themselves. In McCarty’s (#mccarty2004) words: By modeling I
mean the heuristic process of constructing and manipulating
models, a model I take to be either
a representation of something for purposes of study, or a
design for realizing something new. These two senses follow
Clifford Geertz's analytic distinction between a denotative model
of such as a grammar describing the features of a language, and
an exemplary model for such as an architectural plan (Geertz
1973: 93). The premise of our argument is that in
describing their modelling activities DH researchers tend to privilege a
symbolic analysis of texts instead of a pragmatic one. The former view on text
focuses on partitioning it into descriptive chunks or components, be they
material or conceptual, while the latter, as we intend it here, calls for an
integrative approach where the use of language in understanding and
manipulating texts is given a prominent place. By using
pragmatic we subscribe to a functional perspective,
which favours the use of language over other aspects. By
focusing on use, a pragmatic perspective is also integrative in that it aims
at encompassing the full complexity of the cognitive, social, and cultural
functioning of language (#verschueren2012)

By reflecting on modelling practices in DH research, this paper shows how
pragmatic modeling combines theoria cum praxis.
In doing so, the paper discusses a selection of significant literature as well
as some examples across different disciplines and approaches. We will begin by
setting out our pragmatic understanding of modelling.

1.1. A pragmatic understanding of modelling
In this section we will frame DH modeling activities by engaging with recent
work on model building (#kralemann2013). Our focus is on what
Kralemann and Lattmann call the Act of the Interpreter or End of the model or Pragmatics. We aim to highlight how that
aspect of pragmatic modelling might need further attention in a DH context
with respect to the two following elements: flexibility of language and
fuzzy polarities (in particular object vs. model). By using the term
pragmatic modelling we intend to emphasise an understanding of the act of
modelling as anchored to theory and language. Kralemann and Lattmann explain
the semiotic structure of
the model relation as following:
[...] in the context of an
intentional act (i.e. the pragmatics), a subject chooses a set of
objects Oi=1,...,n (i.e. the extension of the model) and a theory or
language (i.e. the intension of the model), which together determine
the semantics of the model, and an object Omod the attributes of
which act as the syntax of the model on the basis of a
representational relation between themselves and the semantic model
attributes: in the context of a theory and with respect to the
respective end, Omod becomes a model of the objects Oi=1,...,n
(#kralemann2013)

Their theory of models as icons in the Peircean sense acts as a generic
framework to contextualise the creation and use of models in the sciences,
humanities and, we could even say, life. To exemplify how this applies to DH
(in line with established understandings of modelling), one could think of a
researcher who is modelling a set of historical documents (her objects). In
doing so she must engage with a theory of text and hence with an
understanding of textual features relevant to her historical research. In
her modelling activity, the researcher maps the theory of text and scholarly
language she uses to describe and understand her documents to a digital
model of her texts. She may use, for instance, a formalisation of the widely
adopted Ordered Hierarchy of Content Objects (OHCO) For a recent
discussion on the OHCO model as empirical observation of the publishing
process naturalised as a theory of texts see . model combined with a Text Encoding Initiative
(TEI) document model. Our researcher chooses a hierarchical model of text
(the OHCO model) which she presumably thinks will allow her to map some of
her understandings of the historical documents under study to a pre-defined
structure (e.g. a TEI schema) and to process those data in some automatic
form (e.g. to create indexes of certain selected elements, to perform
combined searches or specific content analysis). However, in the modelling
process itself she might question deeply the OHCO model as well as the TEI
categorisations, reflecting on her own theory of the historical documents at
hand and realising the constraints of both theory and model with respect to
her objects of interest. She will most likely go back and forth in her
modelling efforts to match – based on her knowledge and scholarly language –
what she would like to elicit in the document (e.g. the organisation of the
diplomatic formulas, the occurrence of names of witnesses in certain
locations in the document, the abbreviations occurring in the date clauses)
with the formal hierarchical structure proposed by one or more of the TEI
guidelines chapters on the encoding of primary sources. Once this mapping
reaches a certain stability and she is able to actually process that model,
her interpretative activity will likely have to zoom in and out of these
manifestations (e.g. between single cases and emerging patterns). She will
often puzzle over exceptions that will allow her to iteratively refine the
original mapping or require a total rethinking of categories and of the OCHO
model being adopted. Single components or parts of the model itself (e.g.
the specific schema adopted and its syntax, the technology, the versions of
the model at x moments in time) cannot account for
the complexity of model
relation as described above by Kralemann and Lattmann. Within
such a reductive analysis of modelling practices, the contextual and
relational construction of the semantics of the model as well as its
pragmatic end are lost.
A pragmatic understanding of modelling, as we understand it here, and as
practiced in DH research, can facilitate the recognition that modelling
operates within relational and dynamic cycles which are elicited via
negotiations over the use of modelling languages (e.g. by renaming
categories of analysis or adopting neologisms). The interplay (usually
referred to as mapping) between the object of analysis (texts in this case)
and the model, as well as across different levels of the interpretative
process (e.g. close and distant reading, symbolic/syntagmatic and
semantic/paradigmatic levels of text analysis), exemplify some of these
dynamic aspects.

2. Modelling in DH
Models and modelling - pervasive in scientific empirical practices – have become
part of the methodological approaches of DH research. Thus the question is: in
what way is DH rhetoric and practices not only attracted by but borrowing from
the techno-sciences? What model of modelling can be considered
adequate to DH? To this end, it is necessary to point
out which are the distinctive features of modelling in the humanities. If
modelling acts as understood from a semiotic tradition are used to make sense of
our cultural objects (mainly but not only texts), they are meaning-making
practices and hence in themselves objects of study for the humanities. Indeed,
as stated below, the modelling process is often recognised as part of what is
being modelled. In this respect it is interesting to note how this applies to
natural and literary languages as well as markup languages:
[...] by its nature the TEI is
designed to handle not only the modeling of that data, but also the
markers of transcriptional, editorial, and interpretative
self-awareness: the non-transparency of the modeling process is itself
part of what is being modeled (and again, I would claim that this is a
distinctive feature of humanities data modeling).
(#flanders2012)
To address the questions above we will reflect on objects, practices and
languages of modelling in DH.

2.1. Texts as complex and open objects
Texts are or at least have been so far the privileged objects of modelling
activities in DH. In explaining why DH belongs to an English
department and so in the context of English studies, Kirschenbaum
explains the prominent DH interest for texts ascribing it to five
factors: its processability compared to other media like images or
audio; the long
association between computers and composition; the
convergence between the
intense conversations around editorial theory and method in the
1980s and the widespread means to implement electronic archives and
editions very soon after; the much- promoted belle-lettristic project
around hypertext and other forms of electronic literature that
continues to this day; the openness of English departments to
cultural studies, where computers and other objects of digital
material culture become the centerpiece of analysis; the
growing interest in e-reading devices and distant reading methodologies.
(#kirschenbaum2010) Here we chose to
focus on some interrelated aspects of the study of texts, which seem to us
particularly relevant to exemplify their complexity and openness with
respect to modelling in DH: dynamicity,
multidimensionality, historicity, and
processuality.
First, we highlight dynamicity Our use of
dynamicity combines the notion of variants of material texts with an
overarching principle of fluid textuality and the sociology of texts
theory. With respect to the former, for instance, Burdick et al. state:
Fluid textuality refers
to the mutability of texts in variants and versions whether
these are produced through authorial changes, editing,
transcription, translation, or print production. In a
fundamental sense, then, texts have always been fluid and
modular. But the advent of word processing drew intensified
attention to this aspect of textuality
(#burdick2012)
. The most recent and comprehensive reflections on the dynamic
aspects of textuality connected to interpretations and modelling
activities in DH can be found in (#mcgann2014); he defines
texts as
dynamic autopoietic
things
(#mcgann2014)
:
How, then, are traditional
texts marked? If we could give an exhaustive answer to that
question we would be able to simulate them in digital forms. We
cannot complete an answer for two related reasons: first, the
answer would have to be framed from within the discourse field
of textuality itself; and second, that framework is dynamic, a
continually emerging function of its own operations, including
its explicitly self-reflexive operations
(#mcgann2014)
. And further:
Organizing our received
humanities materials as if they were simply information
depositories, computer markup as currently imagined handicaps or
even baffles altogether our moves to engage with the well-known
dynamic functions of textual works
(#mcgann2014)
. as an aspect in the study of texts which emerges
particularly in the relationship between models and objects as well as
models and interpretations. DH researchers have engaged with linear texts
all the way towards discontinuous narratives, for instance as structured in
relational databases. In addition, texts as objects being modelled in DH
research are not only or mainly verbal and encompass hybrid modalities such
as maps (#eide2013b). Indeed, dynamic aspects of texts as
modelled in DH research and connected to the nature of cultural artefacts as
such could be exemplified in a variety of ways. Researchers engaged in
scholarly digital editing, for instance, have attempted at modelling the
whole range of material incarnations of texts and the associated
interpretative processes from manuscript witnesses to printed editions, from
diplomatic transcriptions to critical editing. Hence, often within one and
the same digital editing project, textual models do not sit still; they
shift along multiple axes with respect to their objects and interpretations.
The models themselves change shape. So, the axis of textual sources vs.
models of analysis and interpretation of those same sources is mobile; for
example, during the modelling process the sample of sources being selected
might reveal new important features to model – such as a late pagination
within a codex under study originally not included in the encoding model -
which in some cases might also challenge the previous knowledge of those
sources such as the biography of that codex. The axis between the textual
models and the reading interfaces being generated out of them is also
mobile; while developing an interface to a digital edition, the DH modeler
might realise that some features of the original encoding model are not
refined enough to allow for certain visualisations or specific manipulation
of the data. These two axes illustrate the interplay of
model of vs. model for as
described, for example, in (#mahr2009) and .

Secondly, we mention multidimensionality as an aspect of
the study of texts that emerges from the relation between objects and
interpretations. With this respect, we refer to Sahle’s pluralistic model of
text (#sahle2006)
(#sahle2012) which states that the definition of text (e.g.
text as semantic and intentional vs. text as version containing specific
graphemes; text as complex visual sign vs. text as linguistic utterance;
text as material document vs. text as work or rhetorical structure) depends
on how we look at it, on the aspects we are most interested in making
explicit in our modelling efforts and the tacit knowledge invested in those
efforts. This is why the TEI standard aims to account for many models of
texts and is a mobile guide in itself.
Next we turn to historicity, which is the aspect via which we put models in
relation to their historical interpretations. The concept of historicity is
useful to argue that, usually, in DH, modelling acts are also and
necessarily meta-modelling activities because they explicitly engage with
non-neutral objects, that is with objects mediated by prior interpretative
activities even if not always passing via computational
formalisations. On the historiographical aspect to modelling see
also (#flanders2015) Therefore, our
models of texts also embed historical understandings, categorisations and
definitions of those texts. It is evident that this statement does not
apply only to modelling in the humanities. However, while the expression
of the molecular model or of the evolutionary theory have their own
historicity, the meta-modelling role in the
sciences is much less prominent and necessarily embedded in modelling
activities:
If that past model has
changed, or is inconsistent, or incoherent, or unintelligible,
we may be able to correct it, or we may need to incorporate it
and model its difficulties and historicity as well, depending on
what we are trying to accomplish.
(#knox2012)
The last aspect we mention concerns the processuality of the study of texts
located at the interface between objects and subject’s interpretations. This
concept aims at highlighting a further connection between the reading (and
hence also modelling) of texts and our being human. How we read, interpret,
engage with texts is intimately situated in the performative and eventful
process of creating and confirming our own identity .
In conclusion, what this brief encounter with texts aimed to highlight is a
reiteration of how entangled any DH modelling process is with the cultural,
historical and personal engagement we have and had with these complex and
open objects.
2.2. Middle ground: modelling practice and languages
In philosophy of science there has been a lively debate around theorisations
of models and their position in the middle between theory and data or
objects (e.g. (#frigg2012)). Models as used in
experimental settings, including computer simulations, are often
conceptualised as
mediators between theory and
material systems
(#morrison2009)
. Hence, also computer simulations, as a special type of model, can be
perceived as links
between theory and
experiment
(#winsberg2003)
. In a simplified view of experimental settings theorised within such
frameworks, a rather stable physical system exists; any new knowledge
acquired during an experiment is mediated by models of that system (models
of materiality) via a causal connection.
Without aiming at defining experimental practices in the techno-sciences,
this paper dwells on how they are commonly perceived and how DH practice
relates to them. Flanders and Jannidis state for example that
In computer science,
among both theorists working in the academy and those working in
industry doing practical data modeling, most regard data
modeling as a description of a real and objective world (which
includes the possibility of assessing the correctness of data
models) while only a minority views it as a design process.
However, in digital humanities there seems to be a general
understanding that a data model, like all models, is an
interpretation of an object, either in real life or in the
digital realm. Michael Sperberg-McQueen in his closing keynote
to the workshop stated this position clearly: modeling is a way to make explicit
our assumptions about the nature of a text/artefact.
Furthermore, most digital humanities researchers assume that
data modeling is primarily a constructive and creative process
and that the functions of the digital surrogate determine what
aspects have to be modeled.
(#flanders2015)
These perceptions and relations explain the borrowing from
the techno-sciences we aim to unpack and also suggest directions towards a
model of modelling integral to DH research. In the case of computational
models, for example, a physical system is represented by a simulation model,
which is the result of a
discretizing method
(#morrison2009)
passing via various mathematical models of that system. For
example, (ANSYS) offers a comprehensive software suite that spans the
entire range of physics, providing access to virtually any field of
engineering simulation that a design process requires. CAD (Computer
Aided Design) suites are another example of systems to draw objects
independently from their assumed representation scale, implying a high
level of abstraction from the object. Such modelling systems are of
course also applied in the humanities but this paper aims to focus on a
wider interpretation of modelling embedding processes and
language. Now even if this is a simplified view which does not
take into account that a pure empiricism where objects and theories are
entirely separate entities has been questioned by scientists,
philosophers For example, Morrison argues that direct materiality
can be seen as a myth in empirical sciences too when she states
Without models there is
not measurement
(#morrison2009)
to say that models are sine qua
non. Transposed to a computational simulation context, she
sees materiality not in the machine (the computer) itself but in the
simulation model. and of course by the framework of quantum
physics, No doubt the underpinning concepts of uncertainty,
instability, the role of the observer and of conscience, the many worlds
etc. in quantum physics bring to the fore all sorts of interesting
bridges between the humanities and the techno-sciences which are beyond
the scope of this paper. what is interesting for our analysis is
that computer simulations in a techno-scientific context seem to be
perceived as adding a level of immateriality (or better
fictionality) to experimental settings, while in DH
they tend to be perceived as adding an element of materiality to humanistic
interpretation. See for instance the vision proposed by Svensson
(2012):
The digital humanities
need to be materially and technologically grounded in order to
facilitate the often intertwined practical, expressive and
critical work associated with the field
(#svensson2012)
. Beyond empirical and evidence-based humanities, this view is
also connected to design practices, as argued, for example, by Burdick
et al.:
The methodologies of
Digital Humanities are robust precisely because they place
lasting pedagogical value in the creative, generative and
experimental process of design-based research
(#burdick2012)
. The latter resonates in particular with respect to the
popular claim of DH as evidence-based humanities - or what we could call a
Cartesian approach to the humanities - as well as to the criticism towards
DH as a new positivistic approach to scholarship (#eyers2013)
History of culture and science can be read as progressively distancing and
detaching human life from the world of nature via the meditation of tools
and technologies. Interesting the position of Floridiand his intellectual project in which
philosophy is seen to mediate and contribute to harmonise physis and techne. For an overview on objects as subject of
scientific enquiries see (#daston2000) This is a
process that can be summarised as a dialectic tension between two
polarities, that of physis and of techne. Philosophers tried to explain and
mediate this process, but the dichotomy between objects and thoughts, models
and objects, theories and practices, explanans and explanandum,
observer and observetur has become
pervasive and intrinsic to the development of Western thought. So we ask:
does the fuzziness of the two polarities of objects and models emerge in a
new vest in a DH context? This polarity is theorised in philosophy of
science as well as in more generalist approaches like the one inoutlined above and more or less implicitly
inherited by DH research. Above we saw this with respect to
objects (texts); here we also see it contextualised with respect to the
language we use, whether intended as modelling language, language of
representation or language as vehicle of theories and methods. That
modelling practices and language are tightly connected is not new. This is
also the case for modelling in DH (our italics):
You may find you have
to name things; you may have to reify
them, not in the social science sense of making them … beneath
attention but in the AI [Artificial Intelligence] sense of making
them into things that you can address and talk about and think
about. That’s one of the reasons for modelling in
general. One reason why do [sic] we care about making our
assumptions and fundamental beliefs explicit? So that we can
look at them and say, Well, actually I don’t like that one! Could we do
without that one? Can I build a system that doesn’t rely on that
assumption? If you don’t ever surface your
assumptions, you’re never going to be able to think
about building that system, let alone build
it. And you might want to build it, because our
assumptions turn out to have teeth.
(#sperberg)

What a pragmatic understanding of modelling enables us to acknowledge though
is that the opportunities enabled by modelling (e.g. emergence of patterns
of relation, behaviour, and shape) are rooted not only in a demonstrative and literal language but also
in a metaphorical one (#marras2013)
(#mccarty2006). In the context of modelling, language operates
at different levels; for our purposes we could identify at least two: (1)
functional and (2) conceptual. In the former case, a language is used to
describe a model in descriptive yet operational terms; an example is, for
instance, how effectively we apply genealogical terminology (e.g. parent,
ancestors, siblings, children) to navigate the hierarchical structure of an
XML document or to describe any arboreal organisation of knowledge. On the
other hand, in the case of metaphorical language, the terminology being
chosen and the relevant metaphorical models being applied organise the
modelling processes themselves. Below we provide some examples of what this
means in practice.
DH scholarship has been reflecting on the limits of adopting uncritically one
language of computer sciences. Starting from semantic data modelling and the
widely adopted yet controversial term of ontology, Pasin and Ciula,
stated that DH approaches seem to privilege a pragmatic rather than a
realist understanding of the term in light of the fact that ontologies for the humanities must
support diversity and variety of viewpoints;
thus they cannot adhere to an underlying model which neglects
multiplicity in favor of a monolithic vision of the world. The
authors promoted the pragmatic
concept of an ontology as the
agreement reached by multiple parties
(e.g., programmers, scientists, collaborators, librarians) with the
aim of accomplishing some objectives (e.g., data exchange between
applications, communication between people, integration of disparate
representations). Using a metaphor, ontologies are
contracts, they are the currency used
to perform some valuable operations. Thus, their importance is
ultimately related not to their truth or beauty, but to the ease
they bring to the collaboration among people. To use a less
commercial metaphor an ontology is a
compromise or a point of contact between specific
and possibly divergent models. The issue is therefore not only to
identify commonalities between projects, for instance, but also to
agree that the compromises so found wonʼt diminish the value of the
underlying idiosyncratic models, the specificity of any single
project or interpretation. We believe that in the humanities this
agreement is not necessarily reachable once for all or hoped for,
because it may imply the negation of the interpretative efforts that
make a work or a project unique and the negation of the evolutionary
nature of scholarship. However, we also think that the possibility
to make two incommensurable categorical systems communicate could be
a challenge worth pursuing.
(#pasin2009)
Some modelling attempts in DH have embarked on dedicated efforts to
problematise terminology. For example (#crofts2011) developed
refined formalisations of concepts for cultural heritage information
systems; (#eide2013a) tackle the complexity of spatio-temporal
concepts in humanities and arts; (#brown2013) discuss how
concepts of difference and personhood are flattened and smoothened out while
cherry-picking extant semantic web ontological models for research in the
humanities; (#renear2010) call for a rigorous analysis of what
datasets in
multidisciplinary contexts are for libraries, publishing, and data curation.
Other DH scholarship has also ventured in creative attempts at establishing
neologisms. Short and Bradley (#short2005), for example,
discuss the choice of name for the prosopographical model they developed and
used in various DH projects – factoid - as possibly ironic but mirroring the historian’s worry
(#short2005) that what they recorded as assertions in
the historical sources under study are not the same as facts. Pasin
and Bradley (#pasin2013) reflected further on this model
and its developments spread over thousand of years in its conceptual or
fictional incarnation and over a decade in its
digital form:
Multidimensionality,
complexity, and non-linearity are just a few among the many
characteristic features of narratives that could not be easily
reduced to the unambiguous abstract language of databases. As a
result, downplaying or eliminating narratives about people in
virtue of a systematic use of formal structures often causes
historians to worry [...]. It is precisely in this context that
the ‘factoid’- based prosopography was first developed. [...]
the factoid model has been used in a number of prosopographical
projects that, taken as a whole, span across almost two thousand
years of history. This would not have been possible unless this
conceptual framework was general enough to allow this degree of
reusability; however, it is also true that each single project
required a number of extensions to the model. [...] our factoid
approach can show that formal structuring if designed correctly
need not impose, as Veltman implies, a single perspective on the
data it models, but is capable of accommodating a range of views
from the different sources.
(#pasin2013)
. The name is therefore the face of a very much
context-aware approach to history, but, as explained by Pasin and Bradley,
it becomes also a metaphor structuring the corresponding digital resources
in very practical terms:
During the data
acquisition phase, factoids provided historians with
both a guiding metaphor (helping them conceptualize the broader
approach being used) and a usable structure for the data entry work.
Secondly, within the data storage context,
factoids proved to be a practical, flexible, and sustainable schema
for designing databases. Thirdly, during the data
presentation phase, the factoid notion has been used
with success to the purpose of building user interfaces that are
simple yet rich in the way they combine and organize information
about people and make it available to the historians using our
online resources.
(#pasin2013)

These cases cast light on the trade-offs of projecting historical lexicons in
new contexts. They are also evidence that, in DH modelling practices,
language is not purely observational, but correctable and ambiguous. A model
is not an addition to a theory; the non-univocal character of scholarly
language has to be recognised. In this perspective, the relationship across
borders of disciplines is also to be considered as a translation, which
establishes a sort of metaphorical relationship. As the result of an
intercultural marriage between digital and
humanities, DH is a realm of grafting across disciplines. Its scholarship
requires adaptable models that are able to grasp such specificity of
language as well as models that emerge from the specificity of its theories
and objects of analysis, models which emerge out of a modelling process not
directly linked to its observational contexts. Without diminishing the value
of formal and functional languages at the interface between human and
machine communication, what is therefore of interest to us is the strong
intrinsically metaphorical component of the DH modeler’s use of language
(discussed below as modeler’s talk).
In the continuous effort This effort is what McCarty calls
struggle
(#mccarty2014)
after Flanders (#flanders2009). DH
researchers undertake in embracing and fighting a pragmatic model of model
building, a constant resistant dialectic between conceptual expansion and
formalisation takes place. When examined from a diachronic and comparative
perspective, it is also interesting to note that this effort finds parallel
approaches in the history of use and functions of metaphors around the
organisation of knowledge. See, for example, how metaphors structure
and conceptualise some key concepts in philosophy, in particular in the
work of the German philosopher G. W. Leibniz .

3. The place of DH
So where the middle ground is or where models sit depends on where the modeller
stands. How DH practices can use the lens of computing to make critical
scholarship depends on how imaginative our act of modelling is. According to
Godfrey-Smith, it is the modeler’s talk
which fictionalises models and makes them become objects independently of how
they are expressed and of where they lie on the continuum between analytic (or
descriptive) models adhering to physical objects, on one hand, and schematic (or
idealised) models, on the other. He states:
Richly realistic novels are
akin to elaborate computer simulations. Spare and schematic fictions are
akin to abstract analytic models. Parables are like narrative
algebra
(#godfrey)
. Both models and stories are
used in the techno-sciences and the humanities and both are to be contextualised
in space and time:
Fictions do not have the
same role in all of science. They are a particular kind of tool, and
their role changes over time and space. Since WWII, model-based science
has probably become more prominent, and more recognizable as a distinct
strategy rather than an ingredient in a blend. (This would make some
sense of the earlier tendency to see fictionalizing as either everywhere
or nowhere.) Thinking and talking of model systems as imaginary concreta may have become more noticeable,
too. This is perhaps especially due to the role played by computers.
Computers have turned attention away from analytical methods to some
extent. They also make it possible to model more causal detail, and are
powerful tools for visualization.
(#godfrey)

Modelling practices in DH are very well positioned to reveal how choices in model
building are made on the basis of flexible principles and strategies potentially
open to creative reasoning. (#vanzundert2015), for instance,
discusses how assumptions that are tacitly embedded in the code of software
designed for DH research
represent rules and choices
that could have been different as a result of different scholarly
reasoning and argument
(#vanzundert2015)
; equally tacit, the model behind the code is designed, tweaked, and tuned in a continuous
communicative and discursive feedback cycle between developers and
researchers. In comparison to other contexts, in DH models
and stories coexist and are not in opposition. Indeed, with
respect to modelling theorised in computer sciences, the challenge in DH is to
shift the lens of computing up the scale, to embrace the experimental nature of
modelling via, for example, computational coding and to see how it can scale up
to do critical scholarship with/via it. Below we attempt to outline some general
principles on how this can be achieved.

3.1. Middle out method: metaphorical reasoning and pragmatic
modelling
The pragmatic take on modelling, as outlined above, implies some equilibrium
between the two polarities (observation/objects/literal language, on one
hand, and theory/model/metaphorical language, on the other) and overcomes
the misleading dichotomy between observation of the objects and theorisation
(hence modelling) of those objects. A nomologic-deductive process in
building models which distinguishes sharply between theory and observation
has been surpassed in DH theory. With respect to this but mainly focusing on
visual languages in DH, Drucker argues that:
all data have to be understood
as capta and the conventions created to express observer-independent
models of knowledge need to be radically reworked to express
humanistic interpretation.
(#drucker2011)

Linguistic tools and metaphors On the linguistic and creative power of
metaphors, see (#getachew2006) and . Note thatoffer a conceptualisation of metaphors as
meta-models. enable us to move forward the theoretical reflection
as framed so far. In this respect, metaphorical reasoning exemplifies a
specific strategy that can guide modelling in DH to move away from the
dichotomy between bottom-up (models emerging from particulars) and top-down
(models imposed on particulars) approaches. We argue that pragmatic
modelling brings into focus a middle-out method which acts at the crossing
point between data and models adapting itself to specific textual
contexts. Three interrelated properties belonging to
pragmatics (adapted from (#verschueren2012)) can be associated
with this method and explain how metaphorical reasoning functions:
Variability - the range of choices in the use of language cannot
be seen as static in any respect;
Negotiability - such choices are not made mechanically or
according to strict rules or fixed form-function relationships, but
on the basis of highly flexible principles and strategies, thus also
implying the indeterminacy and unexclusiveness of the choices being
made;
Adaptability - such negotiable choices can be adapted based on
specific needs and contexts according to a variable range of
possibilities.

These properties characterise pragmatics not merely in terms of its
interpretative function in reading a specific communicative domain, but as a
cognitive, social and cultural study of language (and communication) as
anticipated at the beginning of this paper. The awareness of the value of
pragmatics in modelling acts contributes to making rigorous practices open
to a creative and imaginative dimension. In this context, metaphors often
function as models to integrate the interpretation of theories, especially
when there are not terms or concepts to be used that are directly related to
the observed facts/objects, in other words when there is an indirect or
remote relation between observer and observatur, explanans and
explanandum. This relation
assumes different characteristics in the empiristic and neo-empiristic
tradition. For a detailed and critical discussion on this point and for
an overview of the realist and formalistic approach toward metaphors in
science as well as the role of analogy see . For an interesting review of the features
and functions of scientific metaphors and related literature see . For an example on the use of metaphors in
understanding the complexity of biomolecular objects see . In these cases, metaphors compensate
or fulfill a linguistic gap, the
inadequacy of the ordinary language for scholarly
purposes.
Metaphors have been largely used by scientists in building experimental and
theoretical sciences, in representing and describing a domain, and in
promoting understanding in scientific investigation. Scientific metaphors
are pervasive in science from antiquity to our time, from Aristotle’s De Partibus Animalium, to the early modern
scientific attitude to modelling as a partnership with craftsmanship and
engineering; from the notion of the world machine, of God as artisan or
architect and the world as his handicraft, to Darwin’s tree of life, from the mind-computer to
the protein-protein interaction as network in more recent science. Metaphors
often act through different pragmatic mechanisms
directly related to the properties listed above: from transposition - moving
concepts from a context to another (variability), to corrections and
interpretations due to new contexts (negotiability), to its reformulation
(adaptability to new contexts). Metaphors describe novelties, help in
understanding and interpreting theories but should not be reduced to be
simply the language of a model (#hoffman1985). In this sense,
the use of metaphors is a strategy to guarantee a non-rigid, descriptive
approach to modelling. This allows the preservation of the
openness of a middle-out pragmatic approach to
modelling as a DH context of study requires.
In DH research, the use of structuring and modelling metaphors is more and
more evident. The metaphorical lexicon certainly pervades the DH discourse,
where terminology and metaphors are intertwined (e.g. surfing, navigating,
artificial intelligence, computer machinery, etc.). Moreover, metaphors are
not only linguistic entities; an interesting range of metaphors in DH is
used for structuring concepts at a macro-level, for example, in the use of
ecosystem
(#marras2015)
to stand for research environment (#textgrid) or the
cartography/landscape metaphor where the aim of the research is to extend the cartographic
metaphor beyond visual analogy, and to expose it as a narrative model
and tool to intervene in complex, heterogeneous, dynamic realities, just
like those of human geography
(#knowledge). Metaphors are also used to organize content and
visualise knowledge and data (#hestia) or to conceptualise the
main features and aims of a research project, for instance in the use of
discovery in the Steve project , where the social tagging is conceived to lead to new ways to describe
and access cultural heritage collections. A metaphor is the
agreement in the framework of scholarship online
promoted by (#NINES); metaphors design the process-orientation
and cross border approach of the review platform for European history (Recensio.net). Furthermore, metaphors
are used to structure the knowledge embedded in some research projects,
highlighting for example their innovative aspects, as in the Discovery
project (
You can travel through the
territory at will but can also design new maps and author guidebooks
for others to read and respond to
(#discovery)
) or making emerge the interrelated work space as formal arena as in
(#AGORA)
In a pragmatic understanding of model building theory and object are
complementary; the model takes a middle position operating within a
middle-out approach. The model preserves its
representational characteristics vis à vis
the object – for instance its intentionality and extensionality as explained
in section 1.1 - but the reality such a model organises at a conceptual
level is not based on a purely descriptive language nor in a projection or
interpretation of properties. As argued infor mathematical modelling. The
model has its syntax, grammar, and semantics but within a processual
consideration of the use of language (a non-static perspective according to
the pragmatic properties listed above).
Bringing to the fore the metaphorical language element allows DH modellers to
also give prominence to the openness and complexity of their objects of
analysis. So within a pragmatic understanding of modeling any model is
primarily pragmatic because it privileges the specificity of the objects and
the contexts of use (of the humanities), but also because its pivot lies in
the manipulability of the models themselves, in terms of their negotiability
and flexibility.

4. Conclusions
In conclusion, departing from open and interdisciplinary conceptualisations of
objects of analysis (such as texts, Section 2.1) and of certain explorative and
epistemological strategies of analysis (such as modelling, see 2.2) we have
attempted to show how a pragmatic framework can be used to contextualise DH
research (under 3.1). Such a framework is useful because it emphasises the
fallacy of rigid polarities (object vs. model; model vs. theory) and the
prominent role of language in the central activity of modelling in Digital
Humanities. What we call pragmatic modeling is not a new
approach but rather a more adequate explanatory framework for existing practices
that combine formal and experimental modelling techniques with a constructive
use of language.
Indeed, this de-dichotomisation reveals that modelling practices are constrained
by the language they are embedded in. In order to overcome this, we attempt to
show how metaphorical language facilitates cohesion and coherence within theory
and practice. Therefore, we draw attention to the role metaphors assume in
organising and structuring knowledge in DH and within its modelling activities
in particular, where the dichotomy between theory and objects is very nuanced.
What we subscribe to is a sort of deflationary
account Godfrey-Smith argues for a
deflationary
view
(#godfrey)
where we give account of the real achievement of a field without
using the ontology embodied in the practice (e.g. that models are
representing the real world). Such deflationary views appear in the way we
talk (hence the connection to language) about e.g. fictional models: Scientists in the field get used to discussing
how such systems behave, get used to talking of what is true or false of
them -- get used to treating a fictional model system as an object in
itself. An outsider might come along and re-interpret this talk as a
collection of claims about deductive relations, conditionals, and so on,
giving a deflationary account of model systems as objects. But inside
the field, it does not seem like this; there it feels like the fictional
model system has a life of its own. of the modelling
practices in DH. Indeed, on one hand, we take the insider’s perspective by
accounting for these practices and by treating our models as independent objects
to study and manipulate, but on the other hand, we enact the outsider’s critical
perspective of self-reflexivity by highlighting the metaphorical nature of the
DH modeler’s talk.
In this paper we attempted to problematise some of the established conceptions
and practices around modelling in DH; however, each issue around model-building
would need further analysis both at the theoretical and practical level. For
instance, it would be useful to corroborate our work with a diachronic and
historical analysis of the role of metaphors in DH and build a map of
DH-specific as well as wider thematic metaphors. In order to further explore the
relationship between theory and practice within DH models of modeling, it will
be important to develop appropriate ad hoc
guiding frameworks (based on case studies designed around the needs of specific
contexts of modelling). Eliciting a pragmatic awareness and giving prominence to
a metaphorical language seems to us a promising way forward to explore such
relationships.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Øyvind Eide for his stimulating questions and feedback.

AGORA Scholarly Open Access Research in European
Philosophy. http://www.project-agora.org (accessed on 22 January 2015).
ANSYS. http://www.ansys.com (accessed on 22 January 2015).
Batterman, Robert W. Idealization and Modeling.
Synthese 169, no. 3 (2009): 427–46.
Bod, Rens. How the
Humanities changed the world OUPblog. OUPblog, 17 February 2014.
http://blog.oup.com/2014/02/how-the-humanities-changed-the-world/
(accessed on 16 October 2015).
Brown, Susan, and John
Simpson. The Curious Identity of Michael Field and Its
Implications for Humanities Research with the Semantic Web. In 2013
IEEE International Conference on Big Data, 77–85, 2013.
doi:10.1109/BigData.2013.6691674.
Burdick, Anne, Todd Samuel
Presner, Jeffrey Thompson Schnapp, Peter Lunenfeld, and Johanna Drucker. Digital_humanities. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT
Press, 2012.
Buzzetti, Dino. Digital Representation and the Text Model.
New Literary History 33 (2002): 61–88.
Ciula, Arianna, and Øyvind
Eide. Reflections on Cultural Heritage and Digital
Humanities: Modelling in Practice and Theory. In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Digital
Access to Textual Cultural Heritage, 35–41. DATeCH ’14. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2014. doi:10.1145/2595188.2595207.
Crofts, Nick, Martin Doerr,
Tony Gill, Stephen Stead, and Matthew Stiff, eds. Definition of the CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model. CIDOC, {Heraklion},
2011. Version 5.0.4. Produced by the ICOM/CIDOC Documentation
Standards Group, Continued by the CIDOC CRM Special Interest Group, November
2011. http://www.cidoc-crm.org/docs/cidoc_crm_version_5.0.4.pdf.
Daston, Lorraine ed. Biographies of scientific objects, University Chicago
Press: 2000.
Discovery Project. http://www.discovery-project.eu/home.html (accessed on 22 January
2015).
Drucker, Johanna. Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display
Digital Humanities Quarterly 5, no. 1 (2011). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html

Eide, Øyvind. Ontologies, Data Modelling, and TEI.
Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, no. 8
(2015). https://jtei.revues.org/1191

Eide, Øyvind, Karl Grossner,
Merrick Lex Berman, and Christian-Emil Ore. Issues in
Spatio-Temporal Technologies for the Humanities and Arts. In Digital Humanities 2013 Conference Abstracts, 46-48.
University of Nebraska-Lincoln: Center for Digital Research in the Humanities,
16-19 July, 2013. http://dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-319.html.
Eide, Øyvind. Why
Maps Are Silent When Texts Can Speak. Detecting Media Differences through
Conceptual Modelling. In Proceedings of the
26th International Cartographic Conference Dresden, 25-30 August
2013. Dresden: ICC, 2013. http://www.icc2013.org/_contxt/_medien/_upload/_proceeding/31_proceeding.pdf.
Eyers, Tom. The
Perils of the ‘Digital Humanities’: New Positivisms and the Fate of Literary
Theory.
Postmodern Culture 23, no. 2 (2013).
doi:10.1353/pmc.2013.0038.
Flanders, Julia, and Fotis
Jannidis, Knowledge Organization and Data Modeling in the
Humanities. 2015. http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/outreach/conference/kodm2012/flanders_jannidis_datamodeling.pdf
Flanders, Julia. Modeling Scholarship. Paper presented at the workshop
Knowledge Organization and Data Modeling in the Humanities: An ongoing
conversation, Brown University, RI, March, 2012. https://datasymposium.wordpress.com/flanders/.
Flanders, Julia. The Productive Unease of 21st-Century Digital
Scholarship.
Digital Humanities Quarterly, no. 3 (2009). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/3/000055/000055.html.
Floridi, Luciano. Harmonising Physis and Techne: The Mediating Role of
Philosophy.
PhilosophyTechnology 24, no. 1 (2011):
1–3.
Frigg, Roman, and Stephan
Hartmann. Models in Science. Edited by Edward N.
Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Stanford University, 2012. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2012/entries/models-science/.
Gentner, Dedre, and Michael
Jeziorski. The Shift from Metaphor to Analogy in Western
Science. In Metaphor and Thought,
edited by A. Ortony and B. Gholson, 2nd ed., 447–80. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1993.
Getachew, Mahlete-Tsigé. Methaphor. Edited by AC Grayling, A Pyle, and N
Goulder. London: Thoemmes Continuum, 2006.
Godfrey-Smith, Peter.
Models and Fictions in Science.
Philosophical Studies 143, no. 1 (2009):
101–16.
Gold, Matthew K. Debates in the Digital Humanities. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2012. http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/.
Hestia. http://hestia.open.ac.uk (accessed on 22 January 2015).
Hoffman, Robert R. Some Implication of Metaphor for Philosophy and Psychology of
Science. In The Ubiquity of Metaphor Metaphor
in Language and Thought, edited by Wolf Paprotté and René Dirven,
327–80. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Pub. Co., 1985.
Jannidis, Fotis, and
Julia Flanders. A Concept of Data Modeling for the
Humanities. Paper presented at Digital Humanities conference,
Lincoln, NE, July, 2013. http://dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/ab-313.html.
Kirschenbaum, Matthew G.
What is Digital Humanities and What’s It Doing in
English Departments?
Association of Departments of English Bulletin 150
(2010): 55-61.
Knowledge Cartography. http://knowledgecartography.org/ (accessed on 22 January
2015).
Knox, Douglas. What
Is the Thing That Changes?: Space and Time through the Atlas of Historical
County Boundaries. Paper presented at the workshop Knowledge
Organization and Data Modeling in the Humanities: An ongoing conversation, Brown
University, RI, March, 2012. https://datasymposium.wordpress.com/knox/.
Kralemann, Björn,
and Claas Lattmann. Models as Icons: Modeling Models in the
Semiotic Framework of Peirce’s Theory of Signs.
Synthese 190, no. 16 (2013): 3397–3420.
Mahr, Bernd. Information Science and the Logic of Models.
SoftwareSystems Modeling 8, no. 3 (2009):
365–83.
Marras, Cristina. Exploring digital environments for research in philosophy. Metaphorical
models and sustainability.
Proceedings of the Third AIUCD Annual Conference on
Humanities and Their Methods, Bologna, Italy-September 18-19, 2014,
edited by Francesca Tomasi, Roberto Rosselli del Turco, and Anna Maria Tammaro.
NewYork: ACM, 2015. doi:10.1145/2802612.2802639
Marras, Cristina. Structuring Multidisciplinary Knowledge: Aquatic and Terrestrial
Metaphors.
Knowledge Organization 40, no. 6 (2013): 392–99.
Marras, Cristina. Pragmatica e Comunicazione: Orizzonti Interdisciplinari. In Filosofia Della Comunicazione, edited by S. Gensini
and L. Forgione, 258–78. Roma: Carocci, 2012.
Marras, Cristina. Metaphora translata voce: prospettive metaforiche nella filosofia di G.W.
Leibniz. Firenze: L.S. Olschki, 2010.
Mazzocchi, Fulvio, and Giancarlo
Fedeli, eds. Knowledge Organization 40, no. 6
(2013).
McCarty, Willard. Becoming Interdisciplinary. In A New Companion to
Digital Humanities, edited by Susan Schreibman, Ray Siemens, and John Unsworth,
2016. Chichester: Blackwell/Wiley, 69-84.
McCarty, Willard. Getting There from Here. Remembering the Future of Digital
Humanities: Roberto Busa Award Lecture 2013.
Literary and Linguistic Computing 29, no. 3 (2014):
283–306.
McCarty, Willard. Tree, Turf, Centre, Archipelago--or Wild Acre? Metaphors and
Stories for Humanities Computing.
Literary and Linguistic Computing Literary and Linguistic
Computing 21, no. 1 (2006): 1–13.
McCarty, Willard. Humanities Computing. Basingstoke [England]; New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
McCarty, Willard, Modeling: A Study in Words and Meanings, in Schreibman
et al. 2004, cit. chap. 19 http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/

McGann, Jerome. New Republic of Letters: Memory and Scholarship in the Age of Digital
Reproduction. Cambridge, MA, USA: Harvard University Press,
2014.
Meister, Jan Christoph. Events Are Us.
Amsterdam International Electronic Journal for Cultural
Narratology 4, no. Autumn (2007). http://cf.hum.uva.nl/narratology/a07_meister.htm.
Montuschi, Eleonora. Le metafore scientifiche. Epistemologia, 40. Milano:
F. Angeli, 1993.
Morrison, Margaret. Models, Measurement and Computer Simulation: The Changing Face
of Experimentation.
Philosophical Studies 143, no. 1 (2009):
33–57.
NINES (Networked Infrastructure for
Nineteenth-Century Electronic Scholarship). http://www.nines.org/ (accessed on 22 January 2015).
Pasin, Michele, and John
Bradley. Factoid-Based Prosopography and Computer
Ontologies: Towards an Integrated Approach.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, June 29, 2013.
doi:10.1093/llc/fqt037.
Pasin, Michele, and Arianna
Ciula. Laying the conceptual foundations for data
integration in the humanities. In Digital
Humanities 2009 Conference Abstracts, 211–215. University of
Maryland, 22-25 June, 2009. http://old.hki.uni-koeln.de/teach/ss10/Koll/DH/DH2009.pdf. (accessed
on 15 October 2015)
Pierazzo, Elena. Digital scholarly editing: Theories, models and
methods. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2015.
Recensio.net. http://www.recensio.net/ueberuns-en. (accessed on 22 January
2015).
Renear, Allen H., Simone
Sacchi, and Karen M. Wickett. Definitions of Dataset in the
Scientific and Technical Literature.
Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology 47, no. 1 (2010): 1–4.
Sahle, Patrick. Modeling Transcription. Paper presented at the workshop Knowledge
Organization and Data Modeling in the Humanities: An ongoing conversation, Brown
University, RI, March, 2012. https://datasymposium.wordpress.com/sahle/.
Sahle, Patrick. What Is Text? A Pluralistic Approach. In Digital Humanities 2006 Conference Abstracts, 188–90. Université
Paris-Sorbonne: CATI, 5-9 July, 2006. http://www.allc-ach2006.colloques.paris-sorbonne.fr/DHs.pdf.
Sangoi, Massimo. Features and Functions of Scientific Metaphors. Edited by Francesca
Ervas and Massimo Sangoi. Metaphor and
Argumentation, Isonomia - Epistemologica, 5 (2014): 75–114.
Schreibman, Susan,
Raymond George Siemens, and John Unsworth. A Companion to
Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell, 2004. http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion.
Shelley, Cameron. Multiple Analogies in Science and Philosophy.
Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins Pub. Co., 2003. http://public.eblib.com/choice/publicfullrecord.aspx?p=622879.
Short, Harold, and John
Bradley. Texts into Databases: The Evolving Field of
New-Style Prosopography.
Literary and Linguistic Computing 20, no. Suppl
(2005): 3–24.
Skousen, Royal, Deryle
Lonsdale, and Dilworth B. Parkinson, eds. Analogical
Modeling. An Exemplar-Based Approach to Language. Vol. 10. Human
Cognitive Processing. Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins Pub. Co., 2002.
http://public.eblib.com/choice/publicfullrecord.aspx?p=622222.
Sperberg-McQueen,
C. Michael. Closing Keynote Presentation. Paper
presented at the workshop Knowledge Organization and Data Modeling in the
Humanities: An ongoing conversation, Brown University, RI, March, 2012. https://datasymposium.wordpress.com/cmsmkeynote/.
Steve: The Museum Social Tagging Project. www.steve.museum/ (accessed on 22
January 2015).
Svensson, Patrik. Envisioning the Digital Humanities, Digital Humanities
Quarterly 6.1 (2012).
TextGrid Forschungsumgebung für die
Geisteswissenschaften. https://www.textgrid.de (accessed on 22 January 2015).
Van
Zundert, Joris Job, and Ronald Haentjens-Dekker. Code,
Scholarship, and Criticism: When is Coding Scholarship and When is it
Not? Paper presented at Digital Humanities 2015 conference: Global
Digital Humanities, University of western Sydney, Australia, June-July, 2015.
Pre-print available at http://jorisvanzundert.net/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/CodeScholarshipCriticism.pdf
(accessed on 13 June 2016).
Verschueren, Jef. The Pragmatic Perspective. In Handbook of Pragmatics, edited by Jef Verschueren, Jan-Ola Östman, and
Jan Blommaert, Rev. ed. Amsterdam; Philadelphia: J. Benjamins, 2012.
Winsberg, Eric. Simulated Experiments: Methodology for a Virtual
World.
Philosophy of Science 70, no. 1 (2003):
105–25.
Wolynes, Peter G. Landscapes, Funnels, Glasses, and Folding: From Metaphor to
Software.
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society
145, no. 4 (2001): 555–63.

