The Almanac Archive: Theorizing
                    Marginalia and Duplicate Copies in the Digital Realm
Lindsey Eckert
Julia Grandison
12 February 2016

The Almanac Archive, a project in its early stages
of development, seeks to create a corpus of annotated British almanacs from
1750-1850. Cheap and useful, the almanac was one of the most commonly purchased
and frequently read print genres during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
By focusing on readers’ annotations in almanacs about everything from social
engagements and weather to historical events and the breeding of livestock,
The Almanac Archive offers insights into
everyday life and ideologies of time. Creating a searchable, digital corpus of
high-resolution images from annotated almanacs will encourage new research
questions about the relationship between historical events, individuals’
everyday lives, and the materiality of Romantic-era interfaces for tracking
time. By theorizing and sharing the ultimate goals and, indeed, challenges of
the project even at its early stages, our aim in this paper is to answer Johanna
Drucker’s call to pay [m]ore attention to acts
of producing and [to put] less emphasis on product during the creation of an interface in order
to expose and support the
activity of interpretation, rather than to display finished
forms
(#drucker2013)
. In openly describing the unfinished form of The
Almanac Archive and its relationship to current scholarly trends, we
outline the technical and theoretical work going into its creation.

The authors describe the technical and theoretical rationale behind The Almanac Archive, a corpus of annotated British
almanacs from 1750-1850.

The Almanac Archive is a digital
project in its early stages of development that seeks to create a corpus of
annotated British almanacs from the Romantic century. The
Almanac Archive’s focus on the Romantic century refers to the
category proposed by William Galperin and Susan Wolfson to describe the intellectually and historically
coherent period between 1750 and 1850 (#galperin1997).
This period involved significant changes both in the production and consumption
of almanacs, including the end of the Stationers’ Company long-held monopoly on
the production of almanacs in 1775, the abolition of the stamp duty on printed
almanacs in 1834, and a general increase in the size of the British reading
public. On the legal decisions influencing the end of the monopoly on almanac
production, see Cyprian Blagden (#blagden1961); on the reading
public and the rise of literacy during the Romantic period, see William St Clair
(#stclair2004) Cheap and useful, the almanac was one
of the most commonly purchased, read, and annotated print genres during the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. By focusing on historical readers’ annotations
in almanacs about everything from social engagements and weather to historical
events and the breeding of livestock, The Almanac
Archive will offer insights into everyday life and ideologies of time
prevalent in Britain from 1750-1850. Upon its completion, it will bring duplicate
copies of almanacs from multiple library collections together, and one key goal of
the project is interoperability with aggregated sites within the NINES network. Creating a searchable,
digital corpus of high-resolution images from almanacs annotated by contemporary
readers will encourage new research questions about the relationship between
historical events, individuals’ everyday lives, and the materiality of Romantic-era
interfaces for tracking time.
Anyone involved in building a digital project knows that technological,
methodological, and theoretical challenges often bleed into one another. However,
here we’d like to step back from some of the concrete technical aspects of The Almanac Archive’s design and implementation to address
the theoretical and methodological questions that a project like ours poses across
fields, particularly Book History, Bibliography, and Digital Humanities.Since
our initial presentation at the Digital Humanities Summer Institute where this
article originally began, we’ve solidified library partnerships, drafted a Metadata
Application Profile for the archive, and begun building a prototype
for the database’s design in collaboration with Siva Kondeti, a computer science
graduate student whose work on the project was funded by Georgia State
University’s Student Innovation
Fellowship Program. By theorizing and sharing the ultimate
goals and, indeed, difficulties of The Almanac Archive,
even at its early stages, our aim in this paper is to answer Johanna Drucker’s call
to pay [m]ore attention to acts of producing and
[to put] less emphasis on product during the creation of an interface in order
to expose and support the activity of
interpretation, rather than to display finished forms
(#drucker2013)
. In openly describing the unfinished form of The Almanac
Archive and its relationship to current scholarly trends, we outline the
theoretical work going into its creation. Therefore, this article also engages
Kenneth Price’s assertion that we
need descriptions of digital thematic
research collections that highlight the editorial work and other types of
scholarly value that are added to the raw materials populating the
collection
(#price2009)
.As Kenneth Price points out, the language scholars choose to define and
describe their projects shapes how we
conceive of and also how we position digital scholarship. Price’s
thoughtful discussion of the terms edition,
project,
database, and thematic research collection has informed our
decision to call our digital corpus an archive because of the term’s print
cultural associations with preservation and inclusiveness, as well as the
associations with thematic editorial attention that the term has acquired in the
digital realm (#price2009) In particular, our
approach to the issue of theorizing and encoding manuscript annotations in printed
books is especially relevant at a time when digital scholars’ interest in marginalia
has been increasing. In articulating the goals and challenges of The Almanac Archive we also make a case for both
questioning what defines a duplicate copy in a digital project and, by extension,
seeking out and reproducing these so-called duplicate copies.
This article begins with a brief explanation of almanacs’ historical importance,
which shapes the form and goals of our resource’s creation as well as its unique
research potential. Understanding how readers used eighteenth- and
nineteenth-century almanacs makes clear how the genre offers scholarly research
possibilities that are not easily harnessed without digital tools. In the second
section of the article we consider the theoretical questions that our project raises
in dialogue with other theorists of digital and print media. In particular, we
explain The Almanac Archive’s intended organizational
structure with reference to trends in digitization that often highlight what Jerome
McGann terms a text’s linguistic
codes over its bibliographic
codes; our archive aims to make the material features of almanacs,
including their annotations, as accessible as the printed content of the texts
themselves (#mcgann1991). Finally, we end with a brief discussion of
the research potential of The Almanac Archive.

Almanacs in the Romantic Century and the Digital Almanac in the Twenty-First
Unlike other print genres, almanacs and the marginalia that readers added to them
give us insight into both everyday life in the Romantic century and the
organization systems that people used to manage it. Offering information about
holidays, university term dates, hours of sunrise and sunset, predictions for
the future, and chronologies of historical events, almanacs were vital books for
a mass number of readers who recorded their observations and daily activities in
their pages. Importantly, almanacs didn’t simply provide a variety of
information; they provided diverse readers with the same standard information.
Variation certainly existed between different almanacs aimed as specific groups
of readers, such as farmers or lawyers; however, the genre as a whole was
largely unified (and, indeed unifying) in the basic, utilitarian information it
provided users about time, geography, tidal shifts, and history.
While almanacs were crucial reference tools, they were also for many readers
repositories of daily observations and records of both public and private life.
Studies of life writing from the Early Modern period to the nineteenth century
have noted that writing in almanacs was one of the earliest and most common
forms of diary keeping. Famous diarists such as William Gladstone and George
Washington began their diaries in almanacs, and far more common, of course, were
anonymous readers who noted births and deaths, daily activities, and memoranda
in their margins (see Figure 1) (#gladstone1968)
(#mccarthy2013). For example, Adam Smyth has identified
the practice of writing personal notes in almanacs as
the most common form of
self-accounting in early modern England
(#smyth2008)
.Similarly, in The Accidental Diarist
Molly McCarthy attributes the development of the daily planner in America to
the practice of almanac annotation common in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries (#mccarthy2013) The almanacs’ prevalence and
their use as diaries increased in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries as
growing numbers of people were able to purchase, read, and write in their
almanacs.

In this 1752 edition of Wing’s almanac, a reader has made notes about
cattle-breeding. Image courtesy of Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library,
University of Toronto.
Our own research has recognized that many readers’ notes in almanacs respond
directly to the information and forecasts offered by the printed text. These
notes often contradict an almanac’s forecasts or record observations about
meteorological events that are not predicted by the almanac (see Figure
2).For more about the ways readers responded to almanac predictions
and forecasts, see Julia Grandison (#grandison2014) As
a result, almanacs are templates for comparing how numerous readers reacted to
the same natural and historical events and responded to the same or similar
texts.

A Shock of an Earthquake noted by a reader on
January 16, 1817 in Vox Stellarum. Image
courtesy of Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library, University of Toronto.
Such comparisons are assisted by the capabilities of digital tools, and The Almanac Archive is designed not only to showcase
the influential printed content of almanacs from the Romantic century, but also
to facilitate the large-scale study of reader habits and observations. Although
many single copies of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century almanac issues can be
found in digital repositories such as Eighteenth Century
Collections Online (ECCO), HathiTrust Digital Library, or Internet Archive, The Almanac Archive
provides users with distinctive ways of accessing and interacting with
this unique genre.In fact, the initial corpus of almanacs from Thomas
Fisher Rare Book Library that are being used for a prototype of The Almanac Archive currently under development
are also available on Internet Archive. We are grateful for IA’s support
processing images from these texts.
The Almanac Archive’s acquisition strategy is
motivated by what we might call thickness rather than breadth. Instead of
acquiring one digital copy of as many issues of as many titles as possible, our
archive aims to present many annotated copies of a single issue. And instead of
prioritizing transcriptions of the printed content of almanacs produced with OCR
or human transcriptions, our archive focuses on the accessibility of textual and
material features of these texts. To this end, we are using
carefully tagged page images rather than textual transcriptions as the primary
organizational units of the database.Our decision to focus on metadata and
manual transcriptions of historical readers’ annotations rather than OCR is
theoretically-driven, yet it is also informed by practical, technological
limitations. Almanacs’ printed content is largely in tabular form with
numerous columns; there is little text that’s readable (to humans or
computers) in a traditional, literary sense. Almanacs contain significant
quantities of numbers, symbols, and abbreviations that are inconsistent
across different almanacs. The almanacs’ original form, then, makes them
difficult to OCR. Other resources that provide access to digitized almanacs
such as HathiTrust and Internet Archive do OCR the texts. The resulting
transcriptions, however, are of limited usefulness since they are plagued by
errors. When completed, our resource will permit users to search for
a variety of fields related to both the material and the textual features of
almanacs from the binding of a particular copy of an almanac and its original
cost to the notes, marks, and drawings made by eighteenth- and
nineteenth-century readers. Users could, for example, search for any annotations
related to the weather made in the month of January 1801. The search results may
well turn up multiple copies of a single issue of a given almanac, enabling
users to compare how different contemporary readers responded to the same
information and the same text. Beyond simply reproducing almanacs for readers in
the digital age, then, The Almanac Archive will
expose various and unique ways of organizing time and recording personal history
and will facilitate comparisons of reader observations. Moreover, as the
following section will discuss, these foci make visible the layered interactions
between text and Romantic-era reader that are cognate with those between digital
text and user.
Almanacs as Interfaces and the Problem of Duplicates
Almanacs are interfaces that embody ideologies about personal and historical time
as well as individual and national experience.Drucker, for example,
suggests that
content models, forms of
classification, taxonomy, or information organization embody
ideology
(#drucker2013)
. For more on the almanacs as interfaces, see Lindsey Eckert ; a podcast of the lecture will be made available on the website for
the Centre for the History of the Book, University of Edinburgh.
Drucker’s work on theoretical approaches to interface design applies to our
approach to representing this genre in digital form, for we are not only
interested in the almanacs as interfaces but in reflecting on the practice of
making the interface through which users of The Almanac
Archive will engage with its content. In particular, Drucker argues
for interface design that makes evident the role of performativity in systems of
organization. She explains:
Multiple imaging modes that
create palimpsestic or parallax views of objects make it more difficult
to imagine reading as an act of recovering truth, and render the
interpretative act itself more visible
(#drucker2013)
. The Almanac Archive avoids conveying a
uniform idea of the Romantic-period reader by representing how
different readers approached, organized, and interpreted both time and their
books in unique ways. While the archive as a whole — its presentation of
published calendars and readers’ annotations about their lives and schedules —
may reveal certain patterns of thinking about time, individual copies with
readers’ annotations speak to the relational and interpretative nature of
reading and annotation. The resource, then, offers the type of palimpsestic
representation that Drucker has so convincingly praised. Thus, The Almanac Archive is not primarily about discovering
truths about almanacs or annotation practices in the Romantic century, but
instead it is about conveying the numerous ways that readers adapted and
subverted, employed and rejected the structures of truth and temporality that
individual almanacs seemed to promote. Moreover, in allowing digital users to
access and analyze marginalia from different readers, The
Almanac Archive will expose that historical users of the almanac
interface did not, in fact, view their own reading as an act of recovering truth but
rather as a layered act of reading and writing that overlaid
printed facts with handwritten (and sometimes contradictory) observations .
Exploring readers’ annotations of and engagements with almanacs speaks to recent
trends in the study of reading history. H.J. Jackson’s Marginalia: Readers Writing in Books (2002) and Romantic Readers: The Evidence of Marginalia (2005)
are notable examples of this growing interest in readers’ annotations and their
potential value for tracking the history of reading. Even more recently, several
digital projects have sought to represent the history of reading and marginalia
through the creation of databases. For instance, Annotated Books Online
(ABO) is a digital archive of early
modern annotated books that gives users
full open access to these
unique [annotated] copies, focusing on the first three centuries of
print
(#annotated2014)
. Spearheaded by the Universiteit Utrecht, ABO includes a variety of
materials from more than ten libraries and has several major partners, including
The Centre for Editing Lives and Letters (CELL) at University College London,
the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research, and the University of
York. Like ABO, The Archeology of Reading in Early Modern
Europe is large in the scope of its primary materials and its
partners, which include Johns Hopkins University, the Princeton University
Library, and CELL. The project will
explore historical reading practices through the lens of manuscript
annotations preserved in early printed books and has been awarded a
$488,000 development grant from the Mellon Foundation . On a more grassroots level, Book Traces, sponsored by NINES and the
University of Virginia under the leadership of Andrew Stauffer,
is a crowd-sourced web project
aimed at identifying unique copies of nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century books on library shelves
(#booktraces2014)
(emphasis in original). Rather than focus on readers per se, Book Traces acts as an argument for preserving unique
copies of nineteenth- and twentieth-century books that are at risk of being lost
or discarded after the content of a clean copy of the same text has been
digitized.Another crowd-sourced project worth mentioning is the Open
University’s The Reading Experience
Database (RED), which tracks readers’ responses to the
books they read between 1450-1945. While some of these experiences take the
form of marginalia, other records of reading in RED come from letters and
diaries.

While each of these resources is unique, they are alike in the relative breadth
of their focus. By selecting a specific genre of books published within a
specific period and geographical location, we aim to create a much more focused
dataset, which highlights the importance not just of annotated copies but of
seemingly duplicate copies of almanacs that have been annotated.
The originality of the resource is that it seeks to present and catalogue as
many copies of the same almanac as possible to facilitate comparison
between readers and different modes of reading. In presenting multiple
duplicate copies of almanacs and showing the diverse uses to which
users have put them, The Almanac Archive presents
digitization as an argument for physical preservation, and the project
challenges the idea that material books are
in a kind of competition with
their own [digital] surrogates
(#stauffer2012)
. The Almanac Archive uses digitization to
draw attention to the importance of retaining duplicate copies that, in
actuality, are quite different.
Moreover, The Almanac Archive’s focus on 1750-1850
is especially relevant to duplicate copies, since the rise of the machine-press
period in the early nineteenth century made mass producing printed texts a real
possibility for the first time. Indeed, the Romantic century encompasses a vital
and volatile time in the material production of printed knowledge, yet the media
transition from the hand-press era to the machine-press era is one that is all
too often simplified and has led to unfounded, persistent assumptions about the
sameness of books from the machine-press period. Many scholars
working across disciplines and temporal periods acknowledge the crucial changes
in material knowledge production that marked the transition from the hand-press
to the machine-press period at the end of the eighteenth century. Laid paper
shifted to wove paper and, soon thereafter, to machine-made paper. The wooden
press that had remained substantially the same since Gutenberg gave way to the
iron-hand press in the early nineteenth century followed by an assortment of
other (steam-powered) presses that produced printed materials in unprecedented
quantities. Yet it wasn’t just the scale of print that grew; the uniformity of
the printed materials themselves also increased. The prominence of edition
binding, for instance, expanded rapidly from the 1820s onward, so that the
standardization of the covers of printed books aligned with the perceived
uniformity of their printed content.For succinct introduction to the
technological shifts from the hand-press to the machine-press period, see
William Proctor Williams and Craig S. Abbott . Such a narrative, of course, obscures the granularity of
technological changes while representing the production of material artifacts as
a flat teleology of technological advancement occurring at the expense of text’s
physical uniqueness or aura, to borrow Walter Benjamin’s term .
In fact, the transition between the hand-press and machine-press period was
gradual and the ability and desire to create uniform, duplicate copies has been
overestimated. As bibliographers have long realized, the variety and uniqueness
associated with early modern books is also
true of books printed after the
hand-press period
(#stauffer)
. One way to quantify this variation is to examine not only
duplicate copies of individual texts or editions (which Stauffer has
done with ten copies of the 1902 edition of the poet James Whitcomb Riley’s
An Old Sweetheart of Mine, each containing
significant bibliographical variants (#stauffer)) but also to
trace a largely-standard genre such as the almanac through this period of media
transition. Comparing duplicate almanacs as well as examining runs of particular
almanac titles across decades challenges the notion of sameness and duplication
in historical forms of printing and reading practices.
Yet, even while we advocate for digitizing and preserving duplicates, we still do
struggle with the logistics of digitally representing them. The question we
return to again and again is how much physical variation or annotation makes a
copy unique for the purposes of our project? A single word written in the
margins? A doodle? A mark? And how do we describe indecipherable or amorphous
marks in our database? In posing these questions, we recognize the necessity of
balancing our resource’s comprehensiveness with its usability. We are reluctant
to flood users with redundant search results containing duplicates with only the
most minor or indecipherable annotations, but we also want to create a resource
that users with research questions very different from our own can employ to
their advantage. The challenge, which continually returns us to the most
interesting and fundamental of digital humanities questions, is how to create a
database structure that categorizes and tags information in a way that permits
users to navigate and search effectively, while also minimizing interpretive
decisions on the backend that foreclose client-side interpretative
possibilities. For example, we initially considered dismissing some of the less
intelligible marks we encountered in almanacs — short horizontal lines penciled
next to given dates. However, even these small marks hold important research
potential. Maureen Perkins’s study of nineteenth-century almanacs notes that
women may have used almanacs discretely to keep track of their menstrual cycles,
for example, and such marks may constitute interesting and valuable data for
researchers interested in women’s studies or the history of sexuality . The variety of uses that readers brought
to their almanacs — and which we are trying to illuminate through our own
resource — reminds us that digital resources risk precluding user
interpretations through the decisions their designers make while structuring
data. To mitigate these lost opportunities as much as possible, we aim for
transparency regarding the organizational principles structuring The Almanac Archive. An article such as this one and
our decision to make available the archive’s Metadata
Application Profile (currently in progress) embodies our desire to be
unabashedly open about the project’s development. Our goal is to make clear the
choices that have gone into the archive’s design from its initial inception to
its actual encoding by emphasizing on the frontend the inherently interpretative
choices that have gone into designing the backend.
Our decision to use page images rather than printed text as the primary
organizational units of the database is one means by which we hope to widen our
resource’s versatility, and it also stems from our questions about current
trends that privilege printed textual content as the primary unit of analysis.
Privileging print risks de-materializing books through digitization because it
substitutes an object’s original organizational structures for a bag of
words approach that, while useful for text-mining, has theoretical
limitations. Focusing on the unit of the page in The
Almanac Archive’s design emphasizes and attempts to preserve the
importance of the page as a conceptual unit that shaped almanacs’ historical
uses in significant ways (#mak2011). Prioritizing the page and
supplementing it with metadata, The Almanac Archive
attempts to limit the appropriative, flattening elements that Hillel Schwartz
associates with copying technologies that take without homage and obscure the historical steps that gave
rise to the original and, in turn, its original uses .
Theorizing The Almanac Archive has therefore led us
to think critically about prominent ways of categorizing digital objects. In
Digitizing Latin Incunabula: Challenges, Methods, and
Possibilities, Jeffrey A. Rydberg-Cox describes five different
categories of digitization: Image Books, Image Books with Minimal Structural
Data, Image Front Transcriptions, Carefully Edited and Tagged Transcriptions,
and Scholarly and Critical Editions (#rydbergcox2009).
The Almanac Archive fits into the category of
Image Books with Structural Data, yet we resist the connotations of
Rydberg-Cox’s term minimal,
for the metadata attached to each image and almanac will allow refined searching
by individual categories, such as publisher, place of publication, library
collection, type of almanac (i.e. astrological or agricultural), and type of
annotation (i.e. textual or pictorial). Thus, we challenge the idea that there
is a hierarchy of digitization involving various degrees of access to textual
content. Instead we conceive ways of digitizing that prioritize the
bibliographic unit of the page. Because the project recognizes and highlights
that almanacs were physical interfaces that users interacted with, we want to
avoid creating a digital interface that privileges either printed text or
manuscript annotations, but instead always displays the two side by side, in
relation to each other. John Bradley’s work on digital annotation has emphasized
how annotated texts involve
two rather different applications
[that] must co-exist
(#bradley2012)
. While we agree that the different agents, intentions, and technologies
of the publishers and the annotators must be recognized, our archive seeks to
emphasize the codependence of these two applications. In this respect, our
approach prefers thinking of these applications as overlapping hierarchies, as Joanna Drucker
does, thereby recognizing the competing ways of valuing different linguistic and
bibliographic components of a digitized object .
The Research Potential of The Almanac
Archive
The unique research potential of our archive is a function of the fascinating
corpus and little-studied genre we have chosen and of our commitment to making
both bibliographic and linguistic features of the almanacs accessible to users.
By valuing equally annotations, printed text, as well as key metadata that will
be included in the archive, we resist privileging one type of information over
another. For our own research we will use the resource to track how eighteenth-
and nineteenth-century readers related to time and historical events, and we
will therefore focus primarily on the annotations found in the almanacs to
compare reader responses to time. Yet annotations also offer other avenues for
scholarly research. For readers unable to afford both an almanac and a dedicated
pocket-book diary, these volumes functioned as diaries. Because they were so
inexpensive, often costing between just one and three shillings, almanacs were
affordable to people who were unable to purchase other printed matter. Given the
characteristics and uses of the almanac in this period, the potential
applications for this project are diverse. Historians of weather, for instance,
might track weather patterns or climate change since users frequently noted
weather anomalies. Thus, material from The Almanac Archive
might support other digital resources such as Old
Weather, which invites users to transcribe weather-related
entries found in ships’ logs. Some almanacs include annotations about payments
to employees and other financial records, indicating that they may be untapped
resources for information about labour and economic history. Readers’ notes in
farming almanacs provide insight into historical agricultural practices.
While in some instances information about an almanac’s annotator remains unknown,
in others inscriptions of ownership or records of provenance provide key
information about annotators such as gender, occupation, geographical location,
and socioeconomic status. Aggregating these entries and this information will,
as the corpus expands, offer a new tool for historians, particularly those
interested in questions of everyday life and gender in Britain.
As compelling as the almanacs’ annotations and annotators are, we are designing
The Almanac Archive to foster other potential
areas of research. For example, the database will contain a metadata field for
the prices of almanacs. This information about price combined with information
about readers’ marginalia could help researchers make more concrete arguments
about annotation practices related to cost of books. The metadata will also
include information about provenance and how copies of almanacs are organized in
library collections. We have, for instance, noted that some users bound a series
of almanacs together. As our corpus of almanacs grows, it will be possible to
draw conclusions about not only the culture of annotating individual volumes but
also larger cultural value systems that impacted how groups of almanacs were
preserved and organized. As Thomas R. Adams and Nicolas Barker have suggested,
the survival and durability of different kinds of texts is an important variable
in any model of book history (#adams2001)
Of course, just as eighteenth- and nineteenth-century readers used the interfaces
of their almanacs in surprising ways, we anticipate that once the resource
becomes live scholars and teachers will use it in similarly original ways. The
flexibility and the variety of our archive’s applications, then, seem to embrace
in a digital, scholarly form the original aspects of the historical artifacts
that will comprise the archive itself. Ultimately, our archive’s unique research
potential lies in the light it sheds on the diverse and unexpected ways users
respond to structured data, whether in eighteenth-century printed texts or in
contemporary digital resources.


Adams, T. and N. Barker.
A New Model for the Study of the Book. In N.
Barker (ed.), A Potencie of Life: Books in Society,
British Library, London (2001), pp. 5-43.
Annotated Books Online | A Digital Archive of Early Modern
Annotated Books.
http://www.annotatedbooksonline.com/.
Benjamin, W. The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction, trans. H.
Zohn. In V. Leitch, W. Cain, L. Finke, and B. Johnson (eds.), The Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism, Norton,
New York (2001), pp.1166-86.
Blagden, C. Thomas Carnan and the Almanack Monopoly,
Studies in Bibliography 14 (1961): 23-43.
About |
Book Traces.
http://www.booktraces.org/about/.
Bradley, J. Towards a Richer Sense of Digital Annotation: Moving Beyond a ‘Media’
Orientation of the Annotation of Digital Objects,
Digital Humanities Quarterly 6.2 (October 12,
2012).
Drucker, J. Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface,
Digital Humanities Quarterly 7.1 (July 1,
2013).
Drucker, J. Performative Metatexts in Metadata, and Mark-Up,
European Journal of English Studies 11.2 (August
2007): 177-91.
Eckert, L. Reading Against the Interface: Almanacs and Hacking Practices
1750-1850 (Lecture). Books and/as New Media Symposium, Harvard
University (May 14, 2015).
Galperin, W. and S.
Wolfson. Romanticism in Crisis: The Romantic
Century, Selected Papers, Presentations and Other Materials from
NASSR 1996 and 1997. Romantic Circles: A Refereed Scholarly
Website Devoted to the Study of Romantic-Period Literature and
Culture.
http://www.rc.umd.edu/reference/misc/confarchive/crisis/crisisa.html.
Gladstone, W. The Gladstone Diaries, vol. 1, M. R. D. Foot and H. C.
G. Matthew (eds.). Clarendon Press, Oxford (1968).
Grandison, J. Negotiating Consensus: Reading Time and Space in
Nineteenth-Century Novels and Popular Print Genres. Ph.D. thesis.
University of Toronto (2014).
Mak, B. How the Page
Matters. University of Toronto Press, Toronto (2001).
McCarthy, M. The Accidental Diarist: A History of the Daily Planner in America.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago (2013).
McGann, J. The
Textual Condition. Princeton University Press, Princeton
(1991).
Perkins, M. Visions of the Future: Time, Almanacs, and Cultural Change,
1775-1870. Clarendon Press, Oxford (1996).
Price, K. M. Edition, Project, Database, Archive, Thematic Research Collection: What’s
in a Name?
Digital Humanities Quarterly 3.3 (September 29,
2009).
Rydberg-Cox, J. A. Digitizing Latin Incunabula: Challenges, Methods, and
Possibilities,
Digital Humanities Quarterly 3.1 (February 26,
2009).
Schwartz, H. The Culture of the Copy: Striking Likenesses, Unreasonable
Facsimiles, revised edition. Zone Books, New York (2014).
Shields, B. Digital Humanities Project Will Explore Annotations in Early Modern
Books,
HUB (July 11, 2014). http://hub.jhu.edu/2014/07/11/archaeology-of-reading.
Smyth, A. Almanacs,
Annotators, and Life-Writing in Early Modern England,
English Literary Renaissance 38.2 (2008):
200-44.
Stauffer, A. The Nineteenth-Century Archive in the Digital Age,
European Romantic Review 23.3 (2012):
335-41.
Stauffer, A. My Old Sweethearts: On Digitization and the
Future of the Print Record. In M. K. Gold (ed.), Debates in the Digital Humanities, second revised
edition, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (forthcoming).
St Clair, W. The Reading Nation in the Romantic Period. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (2004).
Williams, W. and C.
Abbott. An Introduction to Bibliographical and Textual
Studies, 4th edition. Modern Language Association, New York
(2009).

