Digital library search preferences amongst historians and
                    genealogists: British History Online user survey
Adam Crymble
4 October 2016

Is there anything the librarian can do
to improve the success of all browsers, or at least improve the
success of the average browser?
(#morse1970)
Understanding the searching and browsing needs of a digital library’s core users is
important for anyone building a new online resource or refreshing an existing one
(#agichtein2006a)British History
Online (BHO) was seeking to rejuvenate its navigation and architecture
after a decade in production and sought the direct feedback from its users to shape
that process via a voluntary user survey of individuals who had registered accounts
with the project. Volunteers were recruited through an email sent in May 2014 to all
6,301 registered users of the site, which included those with paid subscriptions,
but also those repeat users who opted to sign up for a free account to take
advantage of bookmarking features. 1,439 people responded to the survey call,
representing a response rate of 22.8%. This paper discusses the findings of that
survey as well as how they provide us with new understanding of the different needs
and expectations of academic historians and genealogical users of digital libraries
and archives, providing a basis for future conversations on identifying user needs
more broadly.
BHO is a digital library of key printed primary and secondary sources for the history
of Britain and Ireland, with a principal focus on the period between 1300 and 1800.
The project is an initiative of the Institute of Historical Research, part of the
University of London. The collection currently contains 1,250 volumes, and 120,000
web pages of material (each comprising the equivalent of many pages of
original printed work). The site has particular strengths in the late medieval and
early modern periods up to about 1660, as well as a strong local history
collection.About British History Online,
British History Online (version 5.0)
https://www.british-history.ac.uk/about. As such it is both
unique and typical of digitisation initiatives that contain primary or secondary
source material.
BHO is a product of an evolution in digitisation stretching back to early attempts at
microfilming and microfiching in the last century, but also early digital text
collections such as Project Gutenberg
(#hart1971) as well as multimedia endeavours including the Electronic
Beowulf project (#kiernan1999). It is also specifically the product of
a set of British digitisation initiatives from the turn of the twenty-first century
that focused on digitising British historical source material. These included The Clergy of the Church of England Database, , The Old Bailey Online
(#hitchcock2002)Charles Booth Online
Archive
(#donnelly2002)Eighteenth Century
Collections Online
(#anon1999)Early English Books
Online