A Prosopography as Linked Open Data: Some Implications from DPRR
John Douglas Bradley
29 July 2020


In a TED conference in 2009 Tim Berners-Lee gave a presentation entitled The Year open data went worldwide
(#bernerslee2010). In it he gave some examples of how open data from
governments, scientists and institutions could be used to make
significant statements about the state of affairs in society. He then asked
governments, scientists and institutions to support this kind of work by making more
of their data freely available in a form where it could be further processed rather
than just looked at. This was a part of what he called the Linked
Data Initiative, and which has more recently often been called
Linked Open Data (LOD).
Berners-Lee has a scientific background, so perhaps it was not surprising that he didn't seem
to think about LOD data from the humanities. Nonetheless, there is no technical
reason why those Digital Humanists who have suitable data should not be be making
their material openly available too. Indeed, the desirability of
Linked Open Data from and for the humanities has been expressed by others in the
digital humanities community for some time. One can, for example, see a similar
motivation in the premise behind the workshop Linked Data for
Digital Humanities that was held in the 2016 DHOxSS Summer School (#nurmikkofuller2016)RDF and
Linked Open Data
(#smith2017) at University of Victoria's Digital Humanities Summer
Institute, and in other similar workshops that explore the ideas of applying Linked
Open Data technologies to humanities-oriented materials.
This paper introduces recent project work done at King's College London which makes one of
its many online web resources available as Linked Open Data. The project is the recently completed
Digital Prosopography of the Roman Republic (DPRR), and this part of its work was a response
to Berners-Lee's TED talk challenge mentioned above in which he asked people to deliver their data as LOD.
This paper is also a part of this response. Here we will consider why DPRR was the first humanities project
by KCL to have its full set of data published as LOD data, and what in DPRR's characteristics made it particularly suitable
for this. The paper will then explore what DPRR's LOD server looks like to a user, what kind of interactions with the
data it makes possible, and how this connects with Berners-Lee's view of how LOD should be expressed. Having done
this, it will then consider what might come from allowing anyone to get at this historical material directly as
pure data rather than exclusively through a browser oriented front end which, as we will see below, acts as
a focusing filter between the material-as-data and the user's browser. Does this direct access truly empower people
to explore our material in the way Berners-Lee and other people who have taken up the LOD cause intend? Does
it allow for new kinds of analysis and research to be carried out, hopefully revealing new insights for the
materials that are not visible through even our rather sophisticated browser-oriented front end? Some part
of this issue arises out of research about the nature of querying that has been carried out in the context
of the Semantic Web, and we will briefly describe this here; contrasting the original AI-related vision of
the Semantic Web in the late 1990s, with the more pragmatic Linked Data vision that emerged a few years later.
And finally, how does DPRR's RDF server fit with one of the major interests from the Digital Humanities that
have come out of LOD thinking: an interest in adding links from digital resources to standard authority lists
such as VIAF (#viaf2010)
to aid in the aggregation of data between different data sets?

Why have DPRR as Linked Open Data?
I started work at King's College London (KCL) in 1997, first at its Centre for Computing
in the Humanities which was subsequently renamed the Department of Digital Humanities (CCH/DDH). Most recently
I have also become associated with at a new unit at KCL called the King's Digital Lab (KDL). During this period
CCH, DDH and KDL have built many academic resources in collaboration with humanities academic partners.
In all these projects we have championed the concept of openness and accessibility. As a consequence, since
the late 1990s we have, as conscious policy, made sophisticated online digital resources available for
free over the WWW.
One of the challenges for the work in which I particularly was involved arose
out of the fact that almost all my collaborative academic projects took a strong
data perspective to their materials. This is an
approach which can seem very foreign to the text-orientation of much of the
humanities and the digital humanities too. Having created a highly structured
and complex set of data as a product of the scholarship, how could it be made
accessible to the rather non-technical scholarly audience? Out of this issue
came much work on how to present this complex data adequately through web
applications. Indeed, the development of these delivery apps became a large part of
CCH/DDH's standard project practice, and the focus was always (indeed, had to
be, due to the intended audience) on making that access as non-technical as
possible by creating a web application that mapped each project's data into
dynamic web pages that could be displayed by any browser. Thus, although almost
all browser-mediated resources created at KCL have been open and freely
available, they have not really been conceived as providing direct access to the
data behind the web application in the way that Berners-Lee
meant for LOD in his TED talk.
Recently, however, the Digital Prosopography of the Roman
Republic
(#mouritsenetal2017) was completed, and it presented us with an
opportunity to publish the same material in two different forms. First, like all
pre-existing data-oriented resources that we had created, DPRR has its web
application that made access possible for nontechnical users. Second, however,
and at very little additional development cost, DPRR's data has also been made
available as pure data, in a form suitable for LOD.
Why was DPRR the target for this work? From a fully pragmatic perspective, DPRR
came to be expressed as LOD because in its AHRC funded research proposal we
actually proposed offering direct data access, in the spirit of LOD, as one of
the project's outcomes. Furthermore, RDF and related technologies had been in
the mix within the Sharing Ancient Wisdoms project (SAWS)
project which had been carried out with DDH as a partner, so there was some
significant experience of RDF to draw on in previous work. However, we did not do
the work of expressing DPRR materials in LOD-compatible ways only because we had
promised it in the proposal, or because of our experience with the SAWS project,
but because we believed that DPRR connected in particularly useful ways to the
three components of the idea of LOD: openness, linked,
and data, and we thought it plausible that by opening up DPRR in this
way we would allow others to explore more richly what DPRR contains than what our
conventional browser-oriented mechanisms, as sophisticated as they are, would
enable.
First, Openness: DPRR is a published prosopography, and we believe
that, as such, it offers a highly suitable source for open data. A published
prosopography is consciously intended by its creators for a global audience and
for this reason it is ideally an open publication and compatible to many of the
ideas of open data. This is particularly true for a prosopography which is free
to all online, as DPRR is.
Linked: DPRR is also a good example of scholarship that invokes the
essential spirit and principles of linked data. Of course, DPRR hopes that
modern Roman Republic scholars will explicitly link to it by referencing the
historical entities — presumably primarily historical people — that it
defines. If this happens, DPRR will become integrated into the global
scholarship around the Roman Republic. However, DPRR has more significance to
linking than just this. DPRR, like any prosopography, establishes formal
identities for their historical persons out of the appearance of them in a range of
sources, and it thus links these sources together through their shared
historical people. However, DPRR takes a different approach to its prosopography
than the other, factoid-based (defined in (#bradley2017a)), digital
prosopographies in which DDH/CCH has been involved. Unlike these other
prosopographies, such as the People of Medieval
Scotland
(#poms2014)Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon
England
(#pase2016), which draw almost exclusively on their projects'
interpretation of their primary sources, DPRR has assembled and aligned work
done by a range of already existing nineteenth, twentieth and twenty-first
century prosopographies, and could thus be said, in itself, to represent a
multi-source global graph (to use RDF terminology) of
recent Roman Republic prosopographical scholarship. It, and many of the works
upon which it draws, has been built on the work of T. Robert Broughton's study of
office-holders (#broughton1951) which remains to this day a
standard reference work. Furthermore, underpinning all these other
prosopographies, including Broughton, is the monumental 83 volume nineteenth
century Real-Encyclopaedie der classischen
Altertumswissenschaft
(#pauly1893) — referred to as RE and once called by a DPRR
project member the "grandfather" of all DPRR's prosopographical
sources. RE continues to provide the basis against which historical identity of
individuals is argued even today. A full list of sources that provided data for
DPRR can be found on their Bibiography page. (#mouritsenetal2017)
at web page Bibliography.
Data: Finally, DPRR is like DDH/CCH's many other prosopographical
projects in that it is data-oriented rather than being, as traditional published
prosopography has been, article oriented. Like PoMS or PASE, DPRR represents its
materials in the form of highly structured data, and, like DDH/CCH's other
structured prosopographies, is built on top of that quintessential highly
structured paradigm: the relational database. Thus, DPRR's historical research
work has been expressed in terms of the semantic concepts of
entities, attributes and
relationships as they are thought of in the relational
data model.
Overall, then, DPRR can be thought of as an ideal candidate for all three aspects
of the LOD model: linked, open, and data oriented.
To take DPRR's materials in its relational database and to turn it into LOD
presented in the forms apparently meant by Tim Berners-Lee requires taking up
technologies developed for LOD. Thus, we followed the thinking of the original
developers of the Linked Data (LD) concept, and of the rather broader Semantic
Web too, in adapting the Resource Description Framework (RDF) (#rdf2014) and its related components as fundamental technologies
for expressing DPRR as LOD. RDF links have been described as the glue of the
data web
(#bizer2008), and RDF has been given by LD's
original thinkers as a key part of Berners-Lee's four
rules to allow published data to become part of
a single global data space
(#bizeretal2009). Furthermore, relational data structures
(the paradigm used for organising data in DPRR) generally map particularly well
onto RDF. As Berners-Lee remarks about RDF and the Semantic Web: [O]ne of
the main driving forces for the Semantic web has always been the expression,
on the Web, of the vast amount of relational database information
(#bernerslee1998). Indeed, exactly because of this thinking within
the fundamental design of RDF, the task of mapping DPRR's materials into RDF --
turned out to be conceptually relatively straightforward.
In the online descriptive material I have provided about the DPRR RDF server (#bradley2017b) tool
(#d2rqnd) to map DPRR's database structures into RDF, how I
created a basic semantic web ontology to supplement the DPRR data, and how I
created an RDF server as a mostly stripped down, but in a couple of areas
somewhat extended, version of the rdf4j
(#rdf4j2017) workbench. I based much of the RDF server on rdfj4's
workbench because I believed that it produced quite an elegant thin HTML-based
wrapping around the RDF data that allowed a browser user to explore and better
understand the data without having its HTML wrapping mask or
hide the nature of the RDF. The server's functions are documented at (#bradley2017b)Using DPRR's RDF
server.
