Dendrography and Art History: a
                    computer-assisted analysis of Cézanne’s Bathers.
Melinda Weinstein
Edward Voss
David Soll
14 October 2019

L. Paolo Veronese, Les Noces de Cana, 1563,
oil on canvas, 22 ft. x 3 in. x 32 ft. Louvre (before conservation) R. Paul
Cézanne, Baigneuse debout, s’essuyant les
cheveux, 1869-71, oil on canvas, 11 3/8 in. x 5 1/8 in. Private
Collection. A computer-assisted comparison using the newly developed
DIAS/DENDRON ART (DDA) software of fifty-five oil paintings by Paul Cézanne,
exhibited at the Galerie Vollard, Paris, in 1895, suggests that Cézanne’s
Baigneuse debout, s’essuyant les cheveux,
is highly related to Veronese’s Les Noces de
Cana, in color, saturation, brightness, and complexity (Figures
2-4). Further computer-assisted analysis using DDA suggests that Cézanne
drew from Veronese a hidden compositional structure to
organize his Bather paintings

Introduction

Wölfflin V.2
Art history as an academic discipline is relatively new . In A New
History of the Humanities: The Search for Principles and Patterns
from Antiquity to the Present (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2013), Rens Bod maps art history’s trajectory in the western
world. For Bod, the formal study of art history begins with Vitruvius’s
theory of harmonious proportion in On
Architecture (15 BCE) and continues with Pliny’s discussions
of illusionism in Natural History (77 CE).
Though China had a thriving field of art historical scholarship in the
Middle Ages, the western world produced few written discussions of art
between Pliny and Alberti’s works. Bod cites Alberti’s On Painting (1435) as the first theoretical
treatise on art, followed by Piero della Francesca’s On the Perspective for Painting (1435), A
Treatise on Painting, attributed to Leonardo da Vinci and compiled by
Francesco Melzi (1540), then Vasari’s Lives of the
Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors and Architects (1550).
Bod views the advent of the digital humanities as a natural extension of
the general search for principles and patterns that directs humanistic
inquiry. 311-325. Formally established in 1834 at the University
of Berlin with the appointment of Franz Kugler (1808-1858) as the first
professor of art history, Kugler and his successors Jacob Burkhardt
(1818-1897), and Heinrich Wölfflin (1864-1945) instituted methods for the
formal analysis of art and specified many categories used today for
classifying art (#bod2013)Kugler divided art
history into pre-Greek, classical, romantic and modern periods.
Burkhardt identified the features of Renaissance art. Wölfflin
distinguished Baroque from Renaissance art through the relations of
differences principle employed in structural linguistics. In
analytically comparing paintings, Wölfflin showed that Renaissance art
is linear, flat, and closed, while Baroque art is painterly,
deep, and open. Wölfflin is noted for using parallel projectors in the delivery of art history
lectures so that images could be compared.
Wikipedia contributors, Heinrich Wölfflin, Wikipedia, The Free
Encyclopedia, (accessed September 13, 2017). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heinrich_W%C3%B6lfflin.
If art history is relatively new as an academic course of study in the west,
computer-assisted analysis of art is in its infancy,
with Wölfflin, aided by slide projectors, as the first scholar to
demonstrate the utility of technology in the field. Bod, p. 320.
No matter how much the digital, computational
approach is in its infancy, it provides a powerful tool for testing
hypotheses relating to paintings. As the editors of
Digital Art History note in their 2015
inaugural issue, Wölfflin’s mode of comparison changed
the method of art history for good:
His scientific achievements were a game changer in
perceiving, analyzing, and presenting works of art in the scientific
world and beyond
(#klinke2015)
To say that comparisons have produced the categories that structure art
history as we know it today is not overstating the case. In Collections and/of Data: Art History and the Art Museum in
the DH Mode, Matthew Battles and Michael Maizels stress the
centrality of the comparative slide lecture in the discipline. They write:
The slide lecture maintains a powerful grip on the
collective art-historical imagination; it is the format through which
art historical [sic] training begins, and it is by far the most popular
means by which the discipline spreads its views and virtues to the mass
of uninitiated undergraduates.
Matthew Battles and Michael Maizels, Collections
and/of Data: Art History and the Art Museum in the DH Mode
in Debates in the Digital Humanities
(2016). http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/2. Lev Manovich,
in the first issue of DAH concurs: to explore is to compare. And to compare, we first need to
see
(#manovich2015). While computer-assisted text
analysis has a robust history since the 1950’s, the Proceedings of Computer Vision and Image Analysis of Art in
2008, 2010 and 2011 are the only journals devoted to exploring
computer-assisted methods for art analysis prior to DAH in 2015. In the 2008 Proceedings, editors David Stork and Jim Coddington propose
that computers can reveal the fallibility in our
perception and teach all of us to see with a more informed eye and
mind
(#stork2008)See also Vols. 7531 (2010) and 7869
(2011). Computer-assisted methods of analysis can question the categories we already have, generate new
ones, or create cultural maps that relate cultural artifacts in original
ways
(#stork2008). Since 2008, computer scientists in
collaboration with museum curators have applied computational methods to art
for conservation, reconstruction, and restoration. X-ray imaging, infrared
reflectography, UV-induced fluorescent imaging, and photo-induced
luminescence photography can reveal the under-layers of paintings, identify
the properties of pigments and binders, authenticate artworks, detect
forgeries, and gauge optimal designs for museum and digital displays.
Computer algorithms are used to measure and count brushstrokes, sort and
classify artworks by style, identify the salient features of an artist’s
style, and produce three-dimensional models that illustrate an artist’s
working methods.
Even though digital tools make art available for viewing, pedagogy, and
research like never before, The New York Times announced that The
Metropolitan Museum is making 375,000 images from its collections
available online for however you want to use
them. The National Gallery of Art in Washington, The
Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, and the Museum of Modern Art in New York have
also made their collections freely available to the public for
downloading. Joshua Baron, MET Museum Makes
350,0000 Images Free.
New York Times, February 7, 2017.
the use of data-enabled science, or algorithms, to interpret digitized art
and compare painting styles continues to provoke skepticism among humanists.
It should be difficult today to conceive
of the computer as any more than a speedy idiot obeying a set of
precise instructions; but many in the humanities do indeed continue
to regard it as a black and magical (or black-magical) box — throw
the data at it, and somehow the computer will make sense of
them. Michael Greenhalgh, A Companion
to Digital Humanities. http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/. Stephen Ramsay
in Humane Computation, summarizes
objections to DH: There are many who think scatter
plots filled with data points drawn from, say, English novels, are
already a crime against the humanities — the death of all that is good
and pure about humanistic study. For them, the problem is positivism
in its properly technical sense. They fear an epistemology that does
not merely value empirical data, but which (in its extreme
philosophical forms) considers empirical data to be the only valid
form of evidence. They imagine a computationally driven history or
French literature curriculum that forsakes the ancient circle of the
seminar for the modern angles of the server room. They imagine
humanistic conversation debasing itself in the form of technical
cavils, humanistic ethics becoming nothing more than practical
business ethics, and teaching degenerating into mere
training. As Stephen Ramsay observes in Humane Computing: They fear
an epistemology that does not merely value empirical data, but which (in
its extreme philosophical forms) considers empirical data to be the only
valid form of evidence
(#ramsay2016). We believe that the visualizations produced by
computer applications do not replace direct experience of the artifact.
Correlations do not necessarily indicate causality or an ultimate
relationship in every instance. While a computer may place together certain
artists with similar styles in a cluster, this does not always imply that
there is a historical relationship between them, as their styles may have
simply undergone convergent evolution. The computer’s lack of historical and
artistic context means that the process always has a requirement of human
interpretation.
We propose here computer-assisted techniques for comparing color, saturation,
brightness and complexity between digitized paintings that updates
Wölfflin’s method. No studies of digitized art to date use dendrography, a
well-established method in computational biology since 1990. DIAS , an image analysis program, and
DENDRON (#soll2000), a method for generating
trees reflecting relatedness, are patented, tried-and-true software
programs. Over 400 citations in peer-reviewed literature for the basic
methods paper describing DENDRON support efficacy (#soll1995).
Dendrography pre-dates the bourgeoning field of artificial intelligence and
machine learning. The efficacy of the very latest computer cognition systems
based in machine learning is viewed at this time as inconclusive. As Science Daily (1/7/19) reports in Can artificial intelligence tell a teapot from a golf
ball? Severe limitations of deep learning machines — even
the latest programs cannot accurately identify shape when a pattern
associated with another shape is grafted onto it. Machine learning systems
are easily fooled.
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/01/190107131236.html.
Accessed 1/9/19. Dendrography is a traditional computer-assisted
method of comparing images and patterns. To that end, we believe that the
computer applications DIAS and DENDRON, having been validated in many
fields, may reliably extend the senses,
In the context of book history, and the shift from orality to
literacy, Marshall McLuhan discusses the way technology
extends the senses in The
Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1965. 40. of the art historian. The
visualizations they produce suggest similarities between paintings easily
missed by human beings whose capacity to compare is limited by conceptual
and subjective bias, lack of access to a work, or any number of reasons that
make creating interesting comparisons challenging.
Dendrography has enormously productive applications for the comparison of
formal and iconographic elements in paintings. Since formal analysis is
often viewed as outdated in today’s art history, its potential as a subject
for computational analysis has been overlooked (except for the few
curatorial forays in this direction). As such, our approach not only
attempts to see the value of the computational method, but also what DENDRON
and DIAS may do to open up in surprising new ways what has been considered a
finished part of the field. This may be the first study in digital art
history that uses dendrography to cluster similar paintings and that employs
computer programs to calculate golden rectangles in paintings for
comparative purposes. The ever-growing raft of digitized paintings online,
and the continual improvement of digital photography, calls for
computer-assisted methods as long as these programs are reliable, the
questions posed are appropriate for computer-assisted investigation, and the
final interpretations are considered just that, namely interpretations.
Using the newly customized DIAS/DENDRON (DDA) programs (Appendix I), we investigate in Part I a
persistent connection between Les Noces de Cana
by Veronese and Cézanne’s first female bather La
Baigneuse debout, s’essuyant les cheveux. Les Noces de Cana is enormous in scale, more than twenty-two
feet by thirty-two feet in height and length, while the baigneuse is tiny, only eleven inches in height and five inches
in width. Les Noces de Cana’s subject matter is
biblical, Christ transforming water into wine at the marriage feast, while
Cézanne’s work is prosaic, a woman drying her hair after a bath. A
traditional art historian, guided by genre expectations, might conclude that
scale and theme obviate potential connections between the works, but using
DDA, which normalizes scale, we can grasp surprising connections. Now, using
DDA analysis, we can see how Cézanne capitalizes on Veronese’s color scheme
in his first female baigneuse. We may also use
DDA to suggest new approaches to old problems. For example, Cézanne painted
over eighty bathers in his lifetime, but these paintings continue to mystify
scholars. To date, they are mostly interpreted in psychanalytic terms as
representing Cézanne’s repressed sexuality and/or aggression.J.T.
Clark’s famous Cézanne’s Freud. Representations 52. Fall 1995 is
representative of this approach. Of Cézanne’s Baigneurs en repose he writes, never,
for a start, has a picture declared itself so openly — so awkwardly
— made out of separate, overdetermined parts coexisting only in
sufferance. 94. When we saw that Cézanne’s baigneuse might be intimately connected to Les Noces de Cana, we then employed DDA to explore
potential similarities in composition. In Part 2, using DDA analysis, we
discovered that the composition of Les Noces de
Cana is based on axial symmetry and the golden ratio (phi). When
we apply DDA to identify axial symmetry and the golden ratio to Baigneuse debout, s’essuyant les cheveux and the
rest of Cézanne’s bathers, we find that Cézanne imitates the composition of
Les Noces de Cana in virtually every bather
painting. Based on axial symmetry and the golden section, then, we have
formulated a computer-assisted approach to seeing
Cézanne’s composition in his Bather series. Cézanne’s bathers, formerly
perceived as awkward and composed with baffling imbalance, can now be viewed as golden
(#danchev2013). With DDA, we find that Cézanne is
more likely guided by mathematics in designing his bather paintings, rather
than by unconscious drives or motives.
This approach is an intervention in the newly established trend within the
digital humanities of the micro-digital
humanities.The practices
include the embrace of minimal computing, small data sets, local
archives, and freely available platforms for creating small-scale
digital humanities projects while working with undergraduate
students. Roopika Risam and Susan Edwards, Micro DH: Digital Humanities at the Small
Scale
https://dh2017.adho.org/abstracts/196/196.pdf. We are
not, as Michael Greenhalgh imagines of digital art historians, throw[ing]
data at the computer while hoping that somehow the computer will make sense of them
(#greenhalgh)the
great unknown
(#cohen2009) for connections between texts or visual images,
instead, we are comparing smaller curated datasets in order to measure
influence between a master and student, a source and a re-imagining.
In Distant Reading and Intellectual
History, Ted Underwood writes that distant reading doesn’t overemphasize technology, and it candidly
admits that new methods are mainly useful at larger scales of
analysis. Our work here scales down a distant reading
approach. 138 paintings is still more than the brain can handle in
making comparisons, nevertheless, the data set is small enough to allow
the researcher to toggle between the images and graphical output to
verify hypotheses and make discoveries. In this case, we are
comparing fifty-five curated digital facsimiles of Cézanne’s oil paintings
exhibited in Ambroise Vollard’s 1895 Salon to Veronese’s Le Noces de Cana, a source Cézanne
identified as influential to him as an artist.
Standing before Les Noces de Cana, Cézanne is
reported to have said regarding its color:
That is what a painting should give us, a harmonious
warmth, an abyss in which the eye can sink, a silent germination. A
state of grace in colors…To love a painting, first you have to drink
it in this way, in long drafts, lose consciousness; descend with the
painter into the dark, complicated roots of objects come up again
with colors, bloom with them in the sun. You have to know how to
see, to feel, especially in front of a great machine such as the one
Veronese built
(#doran2001) Art Historian Susan
Sidlauskas describes Cézanne’s experience of the Veronese painting as like
a mystic’s fusion with the deity
(#sidlauskus2004). Cézanne thought of Veronese’s
colors as great noumenal entities, living ideas,
creatures of pure reason…with whom we might correspond
(#doran2001)great
machine, we take Cézanne to mean that Veronese’s work delivers
to the aspiring painter figure studies, compositions, color combinations and
more, structures that an artist can imitate.
Quality of digital reproductions
As Philip Ball observes in Bright Earth, all reproductions are approximations
(#ball2001)Can digital images replace
physical paintings as serious objects for study? Certainly, there are
irreducible elements to paintings that do not translate well
electronically or in print, and that demand first-person viewing, such
as the luminous and changing effects of varnishes and glazes on
paintings, and the layering and aging of paints. Whether in print or
online, all reproductions of paintings are
approximations. In even the most expensively
illustrated books, the same paintings may vary in color. Phillip Ball
discusses the limitations of print and the digital reproductions of
works of art in Bright Earth. He observes
how for a coloristically complex picture like
Danae, no two reproductions will look the same.
Nevertheless, All written discourses of art must
rely on reproductions to make their point. Art Historians
depend on approximations for their work, and computer-assisted systems,
though they convert these approximations into numbers, can provide us
with data that is inaccessible subjectively, data that the researcher
must interpret. And in regards to Les Noces
de Cana and Cézanne’s bathers, we must ask of any facsimile
whether it is well or badly reproduced
(#latour2011). Digital reproductions must be as
close to the original as possible. Bruno Latour and Adam Lowe discuss at
length Les Noces de Cana’s complex
trajectory as an image. What Cézanne saw between
1861, his first trip to Paris, until his death in 1906 is not the Les Noces de Cana that we see now in the Louvre,
as conservationist efforts have modified the painting. Currently Les Noces de Cana exists in its
original (though repainted) version at the Louvre,
and it exists in a fully restored version, based on
digitization, housed in its original context, in a
Benedictine refectory in Venice. The Louvre Les Noces
de Cana is considerably darker than the Benedictine digital
facsimile. The coat of the server depicted in the foreground of the Louvre
Les Noces de Cana was originally red but
was changed to green in 1989. Thus, no version today is exactly what Cézanne
saw. For our purposes here, we use a digitized image of the pre-1989 Les Noces de Cana, with the tabard in his
original red coat. This, perhaps begrimed with more
dust, is the closest approximation to what Cézanne
would have seen. However, we demonstrate that DDA grouped Baigneuse debout, s’essuyant les cheveux in the
same cluster with both renditions of Le Noces de
Cana in dendrograms (Appendix
II).
Choosing Cézanne’s paintings for computer-assisted analysis is also
complicated. Cézanne left many works unfinished, therefore, we selected for
this study paintings exhibited during his lifetime. The paintings exhibited
in the 1895 Vollard exhibition is an exemplary dataset for computation, as
it was Cézanne’s first one-man show, with examples of paintings from every
stage of his development. Most important, we can presume Ambroise Vollard,
Cézanne’s friend and patron exhibited the works as
finished with the artist’s support. For information
about Cézanne’s paintings, and for digital facsimiles, we relied on John
Rewald’s printed Catalogue Raisonné and Walter
Feichenfeldt, Jayne Warman and David Nash’s The
Paintings of Paul Cézanne: an Online Catalogue Raisonné
(#rewald1996)Supplemental
Table I lists all paintings used for this study and their digital
and material provenance. All digital images are in the public domain for
research and educational use. When there were multiple versions of digitized
images on the web with different levels of brightness, saturation, and
coloring, we consulted the online Catalogue
Raisonné, for the best match, or the websites of the museums
that housed the work. In many cases, we checked digital facsimiles against
original paintings on site in New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Detroit,
not only for accuracy in color, brightness, and saturation, but also for
correct margin between figure and frame for our geometric partitioning.
