Information access in the art history domain: Evaluating a
                    federated search engine for Rembrandt research 
Suzan Verberne
Lou Boves
Antal van den Bosch
4 October 2016


1. Introduction
For the interpretation of works of art, art historians study these works along
with different types of textual sources: primary documents describing the works
of art, their maker, the patron, the provenance, etc., but also contemporary
documents related to the social and economic context in which the artist worked,
and secondary literature. The information about works of art, both as primary
and secondary documents, can be found independently in digital (and in part also
non-digital) resources produced by museums, archives and libraries. Increasing
amounts of sources residing in libraries and archives are digitized and made
accessible online (#rodriguez2013)
In a previous project (RemDoc) we developed a
digital collection of primary documents that relate to the life and works of
Rembrandt van Rijn (1606-1669). These documents had partly been published before
in the form of books (#strauss1979)
(#roscam2006). In the Rembrandt Documents (RemDoc) project we digitized them, added metadata, and made them
available through an online search engine.
http://www.remdoc.org
Digital collections such as RemDoc form a pivotal tool for the research
of art historians: they serve as the entry point for and guidance in research
projects. However, for many of the research questions faced by Rembrandt
researchers, often other sources than primary documents are needed. Here are a
few examples of questions that might be asked by Rembrandt researchers:

Was Rembrandt’s Reading Woman in the
Rijksmuseum painted on canvas or panel?
Did Rembrandt paint dogs?
How old was Titus when he died?
Where is Rembrandt’s Storm on the Sea of
Galilee?
Find etchings after Rembrandt’s self portraits

To answer these questions, researchers need to combine diverse and geographically
distributed sources of information: text, images, and bibliographical data.
Probably the most consulted resources for art historical information on the
topic of Rembrandt are the databases of the Netherlands Institute for Art
History (RKD). The database RKDimages contains descriptions and images of mainly
Dutch paintings, drawings, prints and original photos before 1940; the database
RKDartists contains biographical information about Dutch and foreign artists of
the middle ages to the present. For Rembrandt research, the RKD databases are an
important reference. In addition, secondary literature stored in libraries is
relevant for art history research. The dispersed nature of relevant resources in
the Rembrandt research domain motivated us to design and develop an online work
environment that integrates these resources.
This resulted in the development of RemBench.
http://rembench.huygens.knaw.nl/
RemBench provides access to information related to the life and works of
Rembrandt van Rijn stored in four different databases: RemDoc, RKDimages,
RKDartists, and a university library catalogue. These databases are made
accessible through a single search interface. The target user groups of RemBench
are art historians, historians, and other humanities scholars and students who
are interested in Rembrandt’s period, the 17th
century. The goal of the RemBench project was to show the value of online
digital data for art history research. We defined two sub-goals: (1) to connect
the metadata of four different databases and (2) to build a demonstrator search
interface to these databases. The focus of the current paper is on the
development and evaluation of a search interface that gives access to the four
databases.
Access to the four different databases is realized through federated
search. Federated search (sometimes called distributed
information retrieval) is a technique for searching multiple
collections simultaneously with a single query. The results returned by the
selected collections are integrated into a single result page
(#shokouhi2011). Federated search is often used in online library
services that give access to publications stored in multiple different
repositories, but most people also know it from the use of Google, where one
query often generates results from Google images, Google maps and the textual
Google index. In the terminology of federated search, the different resources
are called verticals.
Because of the importance of metadata for searching in the art history domain
(#bates1996a)
(#yee2003), we decided that RemBench should not only allow for
free text search, but also for filtering metadata values. For example, filtering
on location can help find works of art that are stored in Moscow; filtering on
document type can help find birth certificates, and filtering on date can help
find documents from before 1700. The search engine technology that combines free
text search with filtering for metadata values is called faceted search
(#tunkelang2009). Faceted search is commonly used in web shops,
booking sites and review sites, where users can select options for the items
they are searching for. Figure 1 shows the faceted search interface of RemBench.
RemBench will be described in more detail in Section 3.

The RemBench user interface
For the development and evaluation of domain-specific search engines, it is
important to know the information-seeking behaviour of the target group : what type of queries do they phrase given a research
question, how do they formulate follow-up queries, and how do they decide which
results are relevant? However, these behaviours are to a large extent determined
by the functionality and usability of the search system at hand. At the same
time, the satisfaction of a user group with a search system depends on the match
between the functionality and design of the system and the goals of the users.
This interaction makes it difficult to disentangle information-seeking behaviour
and the requirements that a search engine should meet. It is therefore crucial
to observe the target group in interaction with a search engine in order to
understand their information-seeking behaviour and evaluate the usability of the
search engine. Therefore, we set up a user observation study in order to address
the following research questions, using RemBench as a case study:
1. What are the requirements for a search engine that is geared towards the art
history domain?
These requirements follow from the analysis of three user aspects: (a) the
questions asked by Rembrandt researchers; (b) the user-system interactions that
we observe, and (c) the measured user satisfaction. In Section 5, we will
address these three aspects.
2. What are recommendations for the design of a user observation study for
evaluating the usability of a search engine in the art history domain?
These recommendations follow from our experiences with the user observation
study, combined with the recommendations from earlier work on the usability of
search systems.
In Section 2 we discuss the relevant literature. In Section 3 we describe the
RemBench project. In Section 4 we present the methodology for our user
observation study, followed by results and analysis in Section 5. In Section 6
we answer the two research questions, identify limitations of the user study and
make recommendations. In Section 7 we present our conclusions.
2. Literature review
For answering our research questions, two topics from the literature are
important: the information-seeking behaviour of humanities scholars (Section
2.1) and the methodology for evaluating the usability of domain-specific search
systems and analysing user-system interactions (Section 2.2).

2.1. The information seeking behaviour of humanities scholars
When designing search systems for specific target groups it is important to
take into account the information-seeking behaviour of the target user group
(#gossen2013). Many studies address the
information-seeking behaviour of specific target groups, e.g. of medical
doctors (#davies2007), social scientists , academic scientists in general , graduate students , lawyers (#makri2008) and doctoral students in the field of
biology (#vezzosi2009). Some studies address the
information-seeking behaviour of humanities scholars, or even more
specifically, of art historians. For the current research it is relevant to
know whether humanities scholars – and art historians in particular – have
different information-seeking behaviour than other groups and therefore have
different needs for domain-specific search engines.
The work by Bates et al. (#bates1993)
(#siegfried1993)
(#bates1996)
(#bates1994)
(#bates1996a)
(#bates1996b) is a large study of online searching by 27
humanities scholars, conducted over a two-year period. Complete logs of the
searches and output were captured, and a small number of scholars were
interviewed in depth. Based on these interviews, it is arguedthat humanities scholars have different needs than
researchers from other fields, because (a) publications in the humanities
are not so much about fact discovery, but more about the author’s opinions,
and (b) humanities scholars use very different terms than researchers in
other fields to describe the information they need. However, the study was
conducted in a time when web-based search engines were still in their
infancy, which might mean that the reported behaviourmay not be representative of current
information seeking behaviour. Nevertheless, some of the recommendations
made in the final report (#bates1996a) still hold, such as the
recommendation to combine multiple databases in one search engine, and to
enable faceted search:
“Recognize that humanities
searches are often composed of several facet elements. Because the
indexing for many databases is not optimally designed for queries of
this sort, good online database searching in the humanities may
actually be harder than for the sciences, even for the skilled
online intermediary, and will almost certainly be difficult for the
typical humanities end user.”
(#bates1996a)

It could be argued that the difficulty mentioned in the last sentence does
not hold anymore nowadays, since all end users are expected to have
experience with web search engines and web interfaces to databases . For example, it was found that the
expectations and behaviour of the users of digital libraries have changed
since the mid-90s (#sadeh2007). In 2007, Hemminger et al.
found that although bibliographic and citation databases still were the most
commonly used tools by academic scientists for finding information, these
were closely followed by search engines and digital libraries. Hemminger et
al. note that
As free, Web-based
literature databases such as Google Scholar continue to grow, the
distinction between bibliographic/citation databases and Web search
engines is blurring.
(#hemminger2007)
. Around the same time, George et al. (#george2006)
found that 97% of graduate students use the Internet (non-library websites)
as source for information and 73% report the use of Google for their
research-related information seeking. This is also the case for art
historians, as has been shown in more recent research by Beaudoin and Brady
(#beaudoin2011), who studied the search behaviour of
archaeologists, architects, art historians and artists in digital image
libraries. One of their findings was that the art historians who
participated in their study all reported Google Images as their favourite
resource for images.
On the other hand, the study by George et al. (#george2006)
shows that the use of Google is the least frequent for humanities students,
compared to students from other fields, while their use of library databases
is the highest compared to other fields. This may be explained by the
importance of primary sources for the humanities, which often reside in
libraries and archives. Tenopir et al. (#tenopir2009) confirm
this. They found that humanities scholars read fewer articles than academics
from other disciplines, and that they rely more on browsing (as opposed to
searching, using citations and asking colleagues) for finding relevant
articles. However,
this is not to say that
humanities faculty members do not read, but they most likely read
books, primary materials, and manuscripts
(#tenopir2009)
.
The effectiveness of faceted search for research in the art history domain
has been shown by Yee et al. (#yee2003), who present the
results of a usability study in which art history students explored a
collection of 35,000 fine arts images, using a faceted interface for
metadata filtering. They find that for these data, 90% of the participants
preferred the metadata approach over a free-text search functionality,
despite the fact that the latter was more familiar to them. This was likely
due to the nature of the data: images cannot easily be disclosed through
free text search. Metadata can disclose images, but the user then depends on
the terms chosen by the developers of the database for labelling the images.
If there is a mismatch (or the users suspect a mismatch) between the terms
in the database and the terms they would use themselves, metadata filtering
is a better option than free-text search, because selecting the most likely
(best matching) term(s) from a list is more effective than guessing query
terms.
In summary, the literature shows that humanities scholars are experienced in
the use of web search engines, but rely on digital libraries more than
researchers in other fields. Because of the importance of metadata in the
art history domain, faceted search is an important feature for the interface
to databases and libraries.
2.2. Usability testing and user interaction analysis for information
seeking
It has been shown that there is a strong relationship between usability and
popularity of web search engines (#dudek2007); thus it is
important that usability is evaluated properly. The most-used method for
usability testing is to have users from the target group work with the
software or website, and ask them to provide feedback on the usability. With
respect to the number of users needed, Nielsen and Landauershow that for most usability tests, the
proportion of additional usability problems found when adding test users
quickly decreases beyond five users. A common method for registering user
feedback is thinking aloud. Van Waesfound that for usability testing of web applications, the combination of
thinking aloud with recording of the navigation process is a valuable
observation method,
to collect data about various
usability aspects, navigation strategies, and cognitive aspects of
the searching process
(#vanwaes2000)
. The common way of evaluating the usability of search engines is to
give users a series of information problems and ask them to find the answers
using the search engine at hand. Afterwards, the users are presented with a
questionnaire in order to assess their satisfaction with the system . This latter method of usability testing is
adopted in the current paper; in addition, we combine screen capturing with
thinking-aloud as suggested by Van Waes (#vanwaes2000) to
collect the user interactions.
In the interaction between a user and a search system, two aspects play a
central role: (1) query formulation and reformulation and (2) the
examination and judgement of search results. Both topics have been addressed
before:

Query formulation and reformulation strategies in multi-query sessions
are described by Lau and Horvitz (#lau1999) and Rieh . They distinguish query specification (making
the query narrower by adding one or more terms), query generalization
(making the query broader by removing one or more terms) and query
reformulation (replacing one or more terms by other terms without making
the query broader or narrower). The effect of query specification is
generally a higher precision and lower recall of relevant results in the
result set, while the effect of query generalization is the opposite. In
the case of faceted search interfaces, query formulation does not only
comprise the typing of textual queries, but also the selection of facet
values. Kules et al. (#kules2009) found in an eye-tracking
study that users of a faceted search interface working on an exploratory
search task spent about 50 seconds per task looking at the results,
about 25 seconds looking at the facets, and only about 6 seconds looking
at the query itself. These results suggest that facets are important for
users with exploratory search tasks.
For investigating how users process and evaluate the items returned in
response to a query, important work has been done with eye-tracking
experiments (#granka2004). One of the findings of this
work is that users spend much more time looking at the results in the
top five of the result list (especially the first and second result)
than at the results in position six to ten. In the case of federated
search, search results come from multiple information sources (so-called
verticals) and are presented to the user in one
result page. It is interesting to study how users interact with the
combined result page (#ponnuswami2011) and what the
differences are in user behaviour for results from the different
verticals (#spink2006). Ponnuswami et al.address the challenge of page
composition, where the goal is to create a combined result page
with the most relevant information from the different verticals.

Query reformulation patterns will be addressed again in Section 5.2.d, and
result-page composition in Section 3.

3. About RemBench
RemBench connects four existing databases. The first two are RKDartists and
RKDimages, two art historical databases maintained by the Netherlands Institute
for Art History (RKD)
https://rkd.nl/en/
. RKDartists is a database of biographical information about Dutch and
foreign artists from the middle ages to the present day. RKDimages is a database
with descriptions and images of mainly Dutch paintings, drawings, prints and
original photos from before the Second World War. For RemBench, a selection of
records from the RKD databases was made that only includes artists and images
that are related to Rembrandt van Rijn. The starting point for this selection
was the record of Rembrandt himself in RKDartists. In the selection of artists,
all artists were included that are mentioned in the Rembrandt record (either as
pupil of, teacher of, followed by, influenced by
or had influence on). In the selection of images, all works of art from
RKDimages were included that have been created by one of the artists in the
artist selection. The resulting selection consists of 1,857 works of art and 59
artists.
The third database connected to RemBench is RemDoc,
http://www.remdoc.org the
digital collection of primary documents that relate to the life and works of
Rembrandt van Rijn. In the RemDoc project, all known documents have been
collected and disclosed that relate to Rembrandt, as a person and as an artist,
as well as to his ancestors, family, offspring and business partners, from the
15th to 18th centuries. The database contains 2,003 documents. Since all these
are related to Rembrandt, all were included in RemBench.
The fourth database in RemBench is a university library catalogue, digitized and
disclosed through the RUQuest
http://www.ru.nl/library/vm/ruquest system, a library
search system that provides access to the full collection of the Radboud
University Library, and full-text articles of all journals that Radboud
University subscribes to. From the data available through RUQuest, a selection
was made that is defined by all records that are returned for the query
Rembrandt (68,958 records in total).
The RemBench project consisted of two phases: First, the metadata of the four
databases were connected by mapping them onto one common metadata scheme.
Second, a search engine was developed to disclose the data in these databases.
The technology for faceted search and free text search that allows the user to
search all databases at once was developed by the Huygens Institute for the
History of the Netherlands using Apache Solr.
http://lucene.apache.org/solr/
The four databases were treated as four separate verticals in the
interface, not merging the results in one result list. The main reason for that
decision came from the art historians in the research team: They argued that
four different groups of results would be more clear to the user. By doing so,
the challenge of ranking the results from the different verticals relative to
each other (#ponnuswami2011) was avoided. In the user interface,
the verticals are labelled Works of art (group of results from
RKDimages), Artists (group of results from RKDartists), Primary
Sources (group of results from RemDoc), and Library Sources
(group of results from RUQuest). In every vertical, maximally five results are
shown on the front page. To see more results (in an overlay screen), the user
has to click More.
The RemBench user interface was designed by a professional designer, in
interaction with art historians, who added their specific wishes. The beta
version of RemBench was used in the user observation study described in the next
section.
4. User study
As introduced in Section 1, we set up a user study for the observation of
information-seeking behaviour by the target group of RemBench. Based on the
observed information-seeking behaviour, we address the first research question:
What are the requirements for a search engine that is geared towards the
art history domain? For the user study, we adopt the methods for
usability testing described in Section 2.2: we asked users from the target group
to work with RemBench and to describe their actions and motivations using a
thinking aloud protocol. We provided the subjects with a number
of information problems and asked them to find the answers using RemBench. This
set-up allows us to observe the information-seeking behaviour of RemBench users.

4.1. Design, materials and procedure
Students of history and art history (bachelor and master level) from Radboud
University were recruited to participate in the user study; nine
participants (2 male, 7 female, median age 20,5) in total. The participants
were paid a volunteer fee of €10.
The task for the students was to find the best possible answers to a series
of questions related to Rembrandt, using RemBench. Each participant was
given 10 questions (see Section 4.2), one at a time. Some of the questions
expected a single answer (yes/no, name, title, place), others a list of
items. The participants were asked to use all functionalities of RemBench
they needed to find the answers and stop their search when they felt that
they had tried everything to find the answers. It was emphasized in the
instructions that not their capabilities were not being tested, but the
usability of RemBench.
The participants were working on a Windows 7 PC with Firefox. A researcher
started the RemBench homepage for them and gave them the list of questions
to work with.
User-system interaction was observed using a thinking-aloud set-up : The participants were asked to voice their
thinking process aloud, what actions they took in the search process and why
they took them. Before the participants started working with RemBench, they
were asked to orally describe the route they take from home to the
university and count the number of traffic lights, as a way of familiarizing
them with the thinking-aloud procedure (#vanwaes2000). A
researcher was sitting next to the participant and took extensive notes of
what the participant did and said. The researcher tried to minimize the
number of interruptions of the participant, but in some cases she requested
the participant to go to the next question if the participant did not make
any progress in finding the answer(s) to a question. Desktop activity was
recorded using screen capture software, BB FlashBack Express, http://www.bbsoftware.co.uk/BBFlashBack_FreePlayer.aspx
and camera recordings of the user and the computer were made from
behind the user. After 45 minutes, the researcher asked the participant to
finish the current question and skip the remaining questions.
After each question, the participants were asked to write down the answer
they found on paper, and give two evaluative judgments:

How satisfied are you with the answer found? (5-point rating
scale)
How satisfied are you with the use of RemBench for answering the
question? (5-point rating scale)

After finishing all questions, the participants were given a post-task
questionnaire with two evaluative questions:

Please list the positive aspects of RemBench
Please list the negative aspects of RemBench

4.2. Questions about Rembrandt
Two art historians from our research team (who are working in the Rembrandt
domain themselves) formulated a number of questions about Rembrandt that are
likely to be addressed by Rembrandt researchers. They provided 61 questions.
The questions were formulated independently of the possibilities of RemBench
as search tool; this implies that it is possible that for some of the
questions the answer cannot be found using RemBench. With these 61
questions, and nine participants who were each given 10 questions, some of
the questions could be offered twice, which made it possible to measure
agreement between the participants.
4.3. Annotation of the data
The thinking-aloud data, the screen recordings and the notes taken by the
researcher during the user observations were used afterwards to create an
annotated data set of search sessions. A search session is defined as the
series of all actions related to one question (#sriram2004).
The sessions were manually annotated with the following information: the
queries issued, the facets used, and the verticals used. In the case of
facets, using means selecting at least one value of the facet;
in the case of verticals, using means clicking at least one result
from a vertical, or interpreting the results shown for a vertical as
evidence for the answer. These interpretations were expressed by the
users because of the thinking-aloud set-up In the case that a
user opened a result and clicked on the permalinkA permalink is a
unique URL that points to one specific record in a database. A permalink
is meant to be stable for a long period of time. For example, the
permalink to the entry the Nightwatch in
RKDimages is https://rkd.nl/en/explore/images/13893
to the original database (RKD, RemDoc or RUQuest), it was counted as
an additional use of a vertical. Examples of the annotation are in Table
1.

Examples of user interactions for three questions

Question
Facets used
Queries issued
Verticals used
How old was Titus when he died?

-titus
-Artists
Which Works by Rembrandt and his students have been in the
possession of Abraham Bredius?
-Person type -Content type
-Abraham Bredius -Abraham Bredius possession
-Bredius
-Artists -Works of art
Was Rembrandt’s Reading Woman in the
Rijksmuseum painted on canvas or panel?
-Content type -Location
-Lezende vrouw
-Works of Art -RKD

5. Results and analysis
In the next subsections, we analyse the following user aspects using the
collected observation data:

Question types: Which types of questions are asked by Rembrandt
researchers? (Section 5.1);
User-system interaction (Section 5.2):
How many queries, facets and verticals do the users need to answer
one question?
How does the session length for RemBench compare to library search
and general web search?
What are the individual differences between users?
How do users formulate and reformulate queries (query modification
patterns)?

User satisfaction (Section 5.3):
How does usability satisfaction relate to answer
satisfaction?
How does user satisfaction differ between question types?
What positive and negative comments did the users make?

5.1. Which types of questions are asked by Rembrandt researchers?
We classified the 61 questions phrased by the Rembrandt researchers in three
types, using the question taxonomies of Hermjakob et al.and Voorhees (#voorhees2003):
closed questions, factoid questions, and list questions. The distribution of
question types is shown in Table 2. Factoid questions are the most frequent,
but there is also a relatively large share of closed questions and list
questions. Note that list questions are the most difficult to answer because
they require exhaustive searching: In order to answer a question starting
with which works are, the user has to find all
words for which the description in the question is true. Factoid questions
starting with how many have the same characteristic
and can be equally difficult to answer.

The questions classified by question type, with examples

Type
Count
Examples (translated from Dutch)
Closed (yes/no; two options)
17
-Was Rembrandt’s Reading Woman in the
Rijksmuseum painted on canvas or panel? -Did Rembrandt know
Jews? -Did Rembrandt paint dogs?
Factoid
28
-How old was Titus when he died? -How many works by
Rembrandt are in private collections? -Where is Rembrandt’s Storm on the Sea of Galilee?
List
16
-Which paintings by Rembrandt have been in the collections of the
House of Orange-Nassau? -Which works by Rembrandt are in St.
Petersburg? -Find etchings after Rembrandt’s self portraits

5.2. User-system interaction
Fifty-four of the 61 questions were addressed by at least one participant.
The other seven were skipped because not all participants succeeded in
answering all 10 questions assigned to them in the 45-minute time slot.
Fifteen questions were answered by two participants.

5.2.a. How many queries, facets, and verticals do the users need to
answer one question?
From the annotated data (see Section 4.3), we extracted session
statistics.A search session is defined as the series of all
actions related to one question (#sriram2004).
The overall counts are given in Table 3. The results show that on
average, a user issues two queries for a question, but the standard
deviation is large. Figure 2 shows the number of interactions (facets,
queries and source types) for the three question types in our data. A
t-test for independent samples shows that the
difference between the number of interactions for factoid questions and
list questions is significant on the 0.01-level (p= 0.008): list questions require more user actions than
factoid questions.

The average numbers of facets, queries and verticals used per
session
Mean (stdev)
Min-max
Number of facets used
0.86 (1.00)
0-3
Number of queries used
2.11 (1.48)
0-7
Number of verticals used
1.46 (1.03)
0-5

The number of facets, queries and verticals used, per question
type


5.2.b. How does the session length for RemBench compare to library
search and general web search?
We compare the session length for RemBench for session length in three
other search logs:

library search: data from The European Library (TEL) search logs,
analysed by Verberne et al. 2010 Subsequent duplicate queries were removed from the TEL
sessions, as explained in Verberne et al. 2010
general web search in the early years of web search systems
a more recent web search data set from 2006: the Microsoft Search
(MSN) dataset that was distributed for the WSCD 2009 workshop,
Workshop on Web Search Click Data: http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/nickcr/wscd09/
earlier analysed by Hinne et al. 2011

In Figure 3 the distribution of numbers of queries in RemBench sessions
is compared to the distribution for library search and web search. The
average number of queries per session reported by Jansen et al. for the
Excite search engine was 1.6; for the MSN data, the average number of
queries per session is 1.5, which both are a bit lower than the 2.1 of
RemBench. For the TEL data, the average number of queries per session is
similar to RemBench: 2.0.
Figure 3 shows that especially the proportion of sessions with only one
query differs between the different search contexts. The high proportion
of sessions with one query can probably be explained by the high
proportion of navigational queries on the web (33% of web queries,
according to White and Drucker (#white2007)), where the
user already knows which web page (s)he wants to find. The proportion of
one-query sessions increased between 2000 and 2006, probably because web
search engines became more efficient and users more often found what
they needed with one query. The proportion of single-query sessions in
the TEL logs is a bit smaller than for web search, but larger than for
RemBench.

Distribution of number of queries per session, for the RemBench
data, for library search (TEL data set, Verberne et al. ) and for web search (the latter
according to Jansen et al., (#jansen2000) and the MSN
data set, 2006)
Another difference between RemBench, TEL search, and web search is that
in the web search logs and the TEL logs there are no sessions without
queries. In the RemBench interaction data, there are four sessions
without text queries; in these cases, metadata filtering was sufficient
to answer the question. Examples are the question Are there works of
Rembrandt in the collection Otterloo?, where the user only
applied the location facet, and the question Where were Rembrandt’s
children baptized?, where the user only filtered for the value
baptism, marriage and burial records and found the answer
within the returned primary sources.
5.2.c. What are the individual differences between users?

The number of facets, queries and verticals used, per individual
participant
Figure 4 shows the number of interactions (facets, queries and verticals
used) for each individual participant. There is a fair amount of
divergence among users, especially in preferences between faceted search
or free text queries. User 3, for example, hardly used any facets, while
user 2 used more facets than text queries. The average satisfaction
scores of the users range between 2.1 and 3.6.
The relation between number of interactions and answer satisfaction is
analysed in Figure 5. It shows that for the questions with the lowest
satisfaction score, the highest number of queries was needed and for the
questions with the highest satisfaction score, the fewest queries were
needed. Kendall’s τ between the satisfaction score and the number of
queries is -1 (p=0.027). There is no significant
relationship between the satisfaction score and the number of facets (τ
=-0.2, p=0.81) or the number of verticals (τ =
-0.4, p=0.46).

The number of facets, queries and verticals used, per answer
satisfaction score


5.2.d. How do users formulate and reformulate queries (query
modification patterns)?
The query modification patterns in the RemBench data were analysed and
compared to patterns found for web search (#hinne2011).
The following patterns of query reformulation were distinguished :

Request for additional results: the current query is the same as
the previous one (same query is reissued, likely with different
facet values);
Generalization: the current query is a substring of the previous
query. E.g. the query students Rembrandt followed by the
query students;
Specialization: the previous query is a substring of the current
query. E.g. the query winter followed by the query winter
landscape;
Reformulation: the current query has at least one word in common
with the previous query, but one is not a substring of the other.
E.g. the query Rembrandt England followed by the query
Rembrandt travels;
New topic: the current query has no words in common with the
previous query.Note that this is a pragmatic, not a formal,
definition. Two subsequent queries can still be on the same
topic if they have no words in common. Note that the
first query issued by a user by definition starts a new
topic.

The occurrences of these patterns in the queries in the data were
counted. The results are in Table 4. The results show that just like in
web search, the most frequent pattern is new topic. This is not
surprising since every first query of a session starts a new topic. The
proportion of new topic, however, is lower than in web search
data, because RemBench sessions contain more queries on average – hence
a smaller portion of queries are the start of a new topic. An important
difference with web search data is that generalization, specialization
and reformulation are similarly frequent in the RemBench data, whereas
the generalization and specialization are much more infrequent in web
search data. This indicates that it was relatively difficult for the
users to find the precise results they were looking for (not too
specific, not too general). In addition, for some topics, the
reformulations are shifts from Dutch to English or from English to
Dutch, e.g. the query Rembrandt stadhuis followed by the query
Rembrandt city hall.

Distribution of query modification patterns in the RemBench data
compared to the distribution found for web search by Hinne et al.
(#hinne2011)
In the RemBench data

In web search data
Number of queries
150

2000000
New topic
53
35.3%
67.0%
Generalization
26
17.3%
2.2%
Reformulation
25
16.7%
12.4%
Specialization
24
16.0%
4.9%
New topic in same session
16
10.7%
16.6%
Request for additional results
6
4.0%
13.5%

5.3. User satisfaction

5.3.a. How does usability satisfaction relate to answer
satisfaction?
The participants answered the questions How satisfied are you with the
answer(s) found? (answer satisfaction)
and How satisfied are you with the use of RemBench for answering the
question? (usability satisfaction).
Scores were given on a rating scale of 1-5, 5 being the highest
satisfaction score.

The mean score that was obtained for answer satisfaction is 2.90,
with a standard deviation of 1.46;
The mean score that was obtained for usability satisfaction is
2.84, with a standard deviation of 1.27.

We studied the 15 questions that were addressed by two participants, in
order to get an impression of the agreement between the participants.
This agreement was low: weighted Cohen’s κ = 0.06, which indicates that
the agreement was only slightly higher than chance agreement. This
suggests that the evaluative judgments heavily depend on the individual
users.
We found a strong positive relationship between answer satisfaction and
usability satisfaction (Pearson’s r=0.91,
N=54).If the 5-point judgements would not be considered
interval data but ordinal data, then Kendall’s τ should be used.
This test also indicates a strong positive relationship between the
two variables (Kendall’s τ = 0.85, p0.001). This
indicates that usability satisfaction was dependent on answer
satisfaction: If the user was not able to find the answer with RemBench,
then both the satisfaction with the answer and with RemBench are likely
to be low. This might also be one of the causes of the low agreement
between two users on the same question: a user who was able to find the
answer will be more positive than a user who did not find the
answer.
5.3.b. How does user satisfaction differ between question types?
From the satisfaction scores per question, it can be deduced which
questions are more difficult to find answers to (low satisfaction
scores), and which are easier (high satisfaction scores). The lists of
most difficult and easiest questions are shown in Table 5. The table
confirms that the easier questions are generally closed questions and
factoid questions starting with when, where, how
long, etc. Many of the difficult questions are the list
questions, which require exhaustive searching (find all …, how
many …). Figure 6 shows the average answer satisfaction score
and average usability satisfaction score for the three question types in
our data: closed questions, factoid questions, and list questions.
According to the Mann-Whitney U-Test (for ordinal data in independent
samples), the difference in answer satisfaction between closed questions
and list questions is significant at the 0.05-level (p= 0.02).

Analysis of results, showing the questions that are the most
difficult and the easiest to answer, according to their satisfaction
scores. The questions have been translated from Dutch to
English.

Difficult questions (Answer satisfaction score is 1)
Easy questions (Answer satisfaction score is 5)
What is the biggest (and smallest) painting by
Rembrandt?
Was Rembrandt’s Reading Woman in
the Rijksmuseum painted on canvas or panel?
How many brothers does Saskia have and when were they
born?
How long has Willem Drost lived in Italy?
Are there any male portraits by Rembrandt known that are
similar size to his Portrait of a young woman with a dog in
Toledo?
Where were Rembrandt’s children baptized (in which
church)?
Find mezzotints after Rembrandt’s works
When was Aert de Gelder born?
Where is Rembrandt’s Sacrifice of
Isaac?
What is the provenance of the Night
Watch?This is in theory a question that might
require exhaustive searching (find all former locations of
the Night Watch), but since the complete provenance of the
painting is listed in one record RKDimages, it was easily
found by the user
Did Rembrandt have grandchildren; if yes, where were they
born?
Is Ferdinand Bol older or younger than Govert Flinck?
Find literature about Rembrandt by Haverkamp-Begemann.

Find all works by Rembrandt with a sword on them

Find still lifes by Rembrandt and literature about them


The average answer satisfaction score and average usability
satisfaction score for the three question types in our data


5.3.c. What positive and negative comments did the users make?
All participants wrote down positive and negative aspects of RemBench.
The eighth and ninth participant did not bring in any new aspects, which
confirms that there were sufficient users to reach saturation in the
reported usability issues. The lists of positive aspects and the lists
of negative aspects provided by the participants in the post-task
questionnaire were merged, and sorted by topic. The results are in Table
6.
Table 6 shows that the users were predominantly positive about the
graphical user interface, the interaction design, and the content of the
underlying databases. One exception was a critical note on the quality
of the images, a problem that was also mentioned by Beaudoin and Brady
(#beaudoin2011) as an important factor for art
historians when they use digital image libraries. The quality of the
images is constrained by the copyrights of the image owners, and cannot
be influenced by developers of a federated search engine that retrieves
the images.
Table 6 also shows that the users were most critical about the search
functionalities. Below, we discuss the numbered comments in the
rightmost column of Table 6.

Evaluative comments provided by the participants in the post-task
questionnaire

Topic
Positive
Negative
Graphical user interface
-Clear colours, good font type, nice overview, good
layout

-
Interaction design
-Easy to use -Search options are immediately clear
-Results ordered by type

-Sometimes difficult to choose between many search options


Search functionality
-Searching possible in English and Dutch -Good filter
options (especially date range and location)

-It is not possible to search for works by one specific
artist-Differences in results between English and Dutch
queries-It is difficult to find works of art with
specific topics -It is sometimes difficult to find specific
answers-It is difficult to get the intended number of
results: either too many or too few -Searching sometimes
takes a lot of time

Content
-Works of art, primary and secondary sources combined
-Lots of information -Reliable sources in the search
results -References to RKDexplore with even more
information

-Low quality of images

In order to meet comment 1, functionality was added for searching works
by one specific artist by adding a facet Author/artist name in
the final version of RemBench. The inconsistency between results for
English and Dutch queries (comment 2) confirms our observation in
Section 5.2.d that query reformulations are sometimes translations from
English from Dutch or from Dutch to English. The inconsistencies in
results between the two languages are not easy to solve: The databases
contain textual information in both English and Dutch, but not all
information is available in both languages. For example, RemDoc contains
transcriptions of 17th-century Dutch
documents together with translations of the documents in modern English,
while the modern Dutch translation is not included. Although this is a
relevant problem for multi-lingual databases, solving it is beyond the
scope of this research, because it requires expansion of the content of
the (external) databases. The same holds for comment 3, about finding
works of art with specific topics, because indexing depends on the
metadata that is available for works of art in RKDartists (see also the
work by Yee et al. (#yee2003), discussed in Section 2.2).
The selection of metadata values for topics in works of art leads to a
bias towards the retrieval of relevant works: only the topics that exist
as labels in the metadata, and only the works that have been labelled
with these topics can in theory be found with a text-based retrieval
engine. For example, a painting with a dog that has not been labelled
with the topic dog, cannot be found by a text-based retrieval
engine for the query dog.
Since only topics of works of art that have been described in the
metadata can be found, it might be valuable to expand the topical
annotation of works of art in future work, for example by crowd sourcing
(#trant2009). The value of topic annotations for image
search in the historical domain has also been pointed out by Choi and
Rasmussen (#choi2003). They find that subject descriptors
that represent the image content were very important for user
satisfaction. Thus they recommend:
For optimal access,
representations for images should provide access to the topic of
the image and objects within the image, namely, what is
portrayed in the image as well as what the image is
about
(#choi2003)
.
Comments numbered 4 - 6 are related to each other. The users often had
problems finding the exact answer because they got too many irrelevant
results. This resulted in more time needed for finding the answer. The
large amount of results was in many cases caused by the presence of the
word Rembrandt in the query (e.g. the query Rembrandt dogs
for the question Did Rembrandt paint dogs?). For a query with
both terms, the search system returns all documents that contain both
terms or one of the two terms. The Boolean
operator AND could be helpful here (which is allowed in the Solr query
interface, but not used by the participants), requiring that the
returned results contain both terms. In the final version of RemBench,
discounting of the term weight for the query term Rembrandt was
implemented, in order to ensure that for queries with the word
Rembrandt and some other word(s), results that contain only
the other words (e.g. dog) are ranked higher than results that
contain only the word Rembrandt.It should be noted here that if a
search system provides good ranking of the results, the Boolean AND
operator should not be necessary, because results with both terms
present should be ranked higher in the result list than results with
one of the two terms. Also, query terms that occur in few documents
(dogs) should be weighted heavier than query terms that
occur in many documents (Rembrandt). Although this term
characteristic (inverted document frequency) is a component
of the ranking algorithm in Solr (see http://www.solrtutorial.com/solr-search-relevancy.html),
it was sometimes difficult for the participants to get the results
they wanted for queries with one or more high frequent
terms.


6. Discussion
In this section, the two research questions are addressed, and the implications
are discussed.

6.1. Requirements for a search engine in the art-history domain
In order to answer the first research question, the questions asked by
Rembrandt researchers, the interactions of the subjects with RemBench and
the user satisfaction were analysed (See Section 5), leading to the
following conclusions:

RemBench users enter more queries per session than web search users;
the distribution of queries per session is more similar to sessions in
digital library search. This reflects the informational nature of the
questions in a specific topic domain, as opposed to the high proportion
of navigational queries on the web. Still, the average number of queries
needed per question is relatively low (2.0), which indicates that the
RemBench search interface allows for efficient information
seeking.
The combination of different source types is highly important in the
art history domain. Four databases were combined as four different
verticals in the search interface. This was preferred by domain experts,
and also highly valued by the participants of the user study. Especially
the combination of works of art, primary and secondary sources was
considered an important asset of RemBench.
Both free-text search and facet filtering were actively used by the
observed participants. There were individual differences in the
frequency of use of queries and facets: Some users preferred free-text
searching, while others had a preference for filtering facets. This
finding confirms the value of faceted search interfaces for
domain-specific information-seeking tasks.
The users appreciated the presence of multi-lingual data (Dutch and
English) in the connected databases. However, they were critical about
the cross-lingual access to the data. In many cases, they had to try
their queries in both English and Dutch in order to get the results that
they wanted. This illustrates the challenge of managing databases with
multilingual content and shows the importance of cross-lingual
information access to multilingual data.
A search environment for a highly specific domain (such as Rembrandt)
requires domain-dependent treatment of the data and in some cases also
of the queries. Domain-specificity requires pre-selection of relevant
data from the connected databases (see Section 3). In addition, term
discounting for the specific query term Rembrandt had to be
implemented, because it was difficult for the participants to get the
exact results they wanted for queries containing this high frequent term
(see Section 5.3.c). More analysis in future work is required in order
to answer the question that arises from the analysis: under what
circumstances does a highly specific topic domain require
domain-specific re-weighting of query terms, and when are the ordinary
term weighting variables (term frequency, inverted document frequency)
sufficient?

6.2. Recommendations for the design of a user observation study
Previous research has shown that for most usability tests, the proportion of
additional usability problems found when adding test users quickly decreases
after five users. This was confirmed by the user study: Nine participants
were enough to discover all usability issues. The thinking-aloud protocol
was successful. When a researcher makes extensive notes, no microphone
recordings are necessary. In addition, screen capture was more useful than
camera recordings, which provided very little additional information about
the behaviour of the user.
There is a strong correlation between answer satisfaction and usability
satisfaction, and the agreement between two users trying to find the answer
to the same question is low. This confirms that information seeking tasks
cannot be evaluated independently of usability. This is not necessarily
problematic, but should be taken into account in the design of future
usability studies for information seeking: The more difficult the task, the
lower the users’ judgements of the usability. List questions receive the
lowest satisfaction scores (significantly lower than closed questions), and
require the most interactions (significantly more than factoid questions).
Three limitations of the presented user study should be acknowledged: First,
the introduction of an externally imposed information need (a question
formulated by someone else) is an efficient way of studying
information-seeking behaviour. It implies, however, that the participants
were not the owners of the questions. As a result, no strong
conclusions can be drawn about user effort (number of queries issued, number
of results inspected), because the amount of effort that a user puts into a
search task depends on the urgency and importance of his research question –
aspects that are unknown for non-owners. In addition, research by
Chouldechova and Mease (#chouldechova2013) has shown that
topic owners are better capable of judging the relevance of retrieved
results than non-owners. Especially for the questions that required an
(exhaustive) search for elements of a list (e.g. list all..., how
many...) it was difficult for a user who is not the owner of the
information need to judge the completeness of the answer.
The second limitation is that the retrieval effectiveness as perceived by the
user is limited by the content of the underlying databases. Information that
is not contained in the database, such as topical metadata labels for
images, cannot be retrieved by the user. In addition to that, users tend to
trust the information retrieved and the ranking by the search engine : they click on the highest-ranked results. If users
have high trust with the search engine, while relevant information is
missing from the underlying databases or the relevant information is ranked
too low by the search engine, the results found by the users for their
research questions are biased (#keane2008). This effect is
stronger if users do not know what they have not
found. We saw that large individual differences exist in how persevering and
critical users are when they try to find the information they need. In
future research, this user characteristic should be taken into account: when
does a user decide to stop searching, either because he (thinks he) has
found the information he needed, or because he gives up on finding the
information (#baskaya2013)
The third limitation of the study is that all participants were students. One
risk of this is that the information-seeking behaviour of students differs
from the behaviour of (older) researchers (#weiler2005).
According to Rowlands et al. (#rowlands2008), the generation
who grew up with Google-style search relies
heavily on search engines,
view rather than read and do not possess the critical and analytical
skills to assess the information that they find on the web
(#rowlands2008)
. On the other hand, the authors state that the impact of ICT on this
generation should not be overestimated, and that we are all the Google generation, the young and
old, the professor and the student and the teacher and the
child. In addition, university students may act more as
researchers than as ad hoc searchers when they are put in a working context
such as the RemBench user study. Future research should address the
differences between students and researchers in their information-seeking
behaviour.

7. Conclusion
A user observation study with RemBench, a domain-specific federated search engine
in the art history domain, provided several important insights. First, the study
confirmed the importance of different source types (primary and secondary
sources, textual and graphical sources) for the art history domain, which is not
an atypical domain in the humanities; e.g. archaeology, media studies,
historical literary and linguistic studies often work with combinations of
textual and graphical sources. We showed that different source types from
multiple databases can successfully be combined in a federated
search engine. Second, we found that although there are large
individual differences in the preferred information seeking style, faceted
search is a highly valued functionality. In addition, the study
presented in this paper showed that the usability of domain-specific search
engines can be evaluated successfully using a thinking-aloud protocol with a
small number of participants, but that the measures usability satisfaction
depends on the difficulty of the task given to the user.
Acknowledgements
The research for this paper was funded by CLARIN-NL under grant number
CLARIN-NL-12-022. We thank our partners Huygens ING, the Netherlands Institute
for Art History RKD and our colleagues from the art history department for their
collaboration.


Baskaya,
F., Keskustalo, H.,Järvelin, K. (2013, October). Modeling behavioral factors ininteractive information retrieval.
In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference
on Conference on informationknowledge management (pp.
2297-2302). ACM.
Bates, M. J.,
Wilde, D. N.,Siegfried, S. (1993). An analysis of
search terminology used by humanities scholars: the Getty Online Searching
Project Report Number 1. The Library
Quarterly, 1-39.
Siegfried,
S., Bates, M. J.,Wilde, D. N. (1993). A profile of
end‐user searching behavior by humanities scholars: The Getty Online
Searching Project Report No. 2. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 44(5), 273-291.
Bates, M. J.,
Wilde, D. N.,Siegfried, S. (1996). Research
practices of humanities scholars in an online environment: The Getty online
searching project report no. 3. Library
Information Science Research, 17(1), 5-40.
Bates, M. J.
(1994). The design of databases and other information
resources for humanities scholars: The Getty Online Searching Project Report
No. 4. Online and CD-ROM review, 18(6),
331-340.
Bates, M. J. (1996). Document familiarity, relevance, and bradford's law: The Getty
online searching project report no. 5. Information ProcessingManagement, 32(6), 697-707.
Bates, M. J. (1996). The Getty end-user online searching project in the humanities:
Report no. 6: Overview and conclusions. College
Research Libraries, 57(6), 514-523.
Beaudoin, J. E.,
Brady, J. E. (2011). Finding visual information: A study of
image resources used by archaeologists, architects, art historians, and
artists. Art Documentation: Journal of the Art
Libraries Society of North America, 24-36.
Choi, Y.,Rasmussen,
E. M. (2003). Searching for images: the analysis of users'
queries for image retrieval in American history. Journal of the American society for information science and
technology, 54 (6), 498-511.
Chouldechova,
A.,Mease, D. (2013). Differences in search engine
evaluations between query owners and non-owners. In Proceedings of the sixth ACM international conference on Web
search and data mining (pp. 103-112). ACM.
Davies, K. (2007). The information‐seeking behaviour of doctors: a review of the
evidence. Health InformationLibraries
Journal, 24(2), 78-94.
Dudek, D.,
Mastora, A.,Landoni, M. (2007). Is Google the
answer? A study into usability of search engines. Library Review, 56(3), 224-233.
George, C. A., Bright, A., Hurlbert, T., Linke, E. C., St
Clair, G.,Stein, J. (2006). Scholarly use of
information: graduate students' information seeking behaviour.
Information Research, 11(4).
Gerjets, P.,
Kammerer, Y.,Werner, B. (2011). Measuring
spontaneous and instructed evaluation processes during Web search:
Integrating concurrent thinking-aloud protocols and eye-tracking
data. Learning and Instruction, 21(2),
220-231.
Gossen, T.,
Hempel, J.,Nürnberger, A. (2013). Find it if you
can: usability case study of search engines for young users. Personal and ubiquitous computing, 17(8),
1593-1603.
Granka, L. A.,
Joachims, T.,Gay, G. (2004, July). Eye-tracking
analysis of user behavior in WWW search. In Proceedings of the 27th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on
Research and development in information retrieval (pp. 478-479).
ACM.
Hemminger, B. M., Lu, D., Vaughan, K. T. L.,Adams, S. J. (2007). Information seeking behavior of academic scientists.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology, 58(14), 2205-2225.
Hermjakob, U.,
Hovy, E. H.,Lin, C. Y. (2000). Knowledge-based
question answering. In Proceedings of the Sixth
World Multiconference on Systems, Cybernetics, and Informatics
(SCI-2002).
Hinne, M., van der Heijden, M., Verberne, S.,Kraaij, W. (2011). A multi-dimensional model for search intent. In Proceedings of the Dutch-Belgium Information Retrieval
workshop (pp. 20-24)
Jansen, B. J.,
Spink, A.,Saracevic, T. (2000). Real life, real
users, and real needs: a study and analysis of user queries on the
web. Information processing
management, 36(2), 207-227.
Jansen, B. J.,Spink,
A. (2006). How are we searching the World Wide Web? A
comparison of nine search engine transaction logs. Information ProcessingManagement, 42(1),
248-263.
Jacsó, Péter (2004). Thoughts about federated searching. Information Today: 21(9).
Keane, M. T.,
O'Brien, M.,Smyth, B. (2008). Are people biased in
their use of search engines?. Communications of
the ACM, 51(2), 49-52.
Kules, B.,
Capra, R., Banta, M.,Sierra, T. (2009, June). What
do exploratory searchers look at in a faceted search interface?. In
Proceedings of the 9th ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on
Digital libraries (pp. 313-322). ACM.
Lalmas, M. (2011). Aggregated search. In Advanced
Topics in Information Retrieval (pp. 109-123). Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
Lau, T.,Horvitz, E.
(1999). Patterns of search: analyzing and modeling web
query refinement (pp. 119-128). Springer Vienna.
Makri, S.,
Blandford, A.,Cox, A. L. (2008). Investigating the
information-seeking behaviour of academic lawyers: From Ellis’s model to
design. Information Processing
Management 44 (2), 613-634.
Meho, L. I.,Tibbo, H. R.
(2003). Modeling the information‐seeking behavior of social
scientists: Ellis's study revisited. Journal of
the American society for Information Science and Technology 54(6),
570-587.
Nielsen, J.,
Landauer, T. K. (1993, May). A mathematical model of the
finding of usability problems. In Proceedings
of the INTERACT'93 and CHI'93 conference on Human factors in computing
systems (pp. 206-213). ACM.
Rodríguez Ortega, N.
(2013). It’s Time to Rethink and Expand Art History for the
Digital Age. The Getty Iris. Retrieved
from
http://blogs.getty.edu/iris/its-time-to-rethink-and-expand-art-history-for-the-digital-age

Pan, B., Hembrooke, H., Joachims, T., Lorigo, L., Gay, G.,
Granka, L. (2007). In google we trust: Users’
decisions on rank, position, and relevance. Journal of Computer‐Mediated Communication, 12(3), 801-823.
Ponnuswami, A. K., Pattabiraman, K., Wu, Q.,
Gilad-Bachrach, R.,Kanungo, T. (2011, February). On
composition of a federated web search result page: using online users to
provide pairwise preference for heterogeneous verticals. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM international conference on Web
search and data mining (pp. 715-724). ACM.
Rieh, S. Y. (2006). Analysis of multiple query reformulations on the web: The interactive
information retrieval context. Information
ProcessingManagement, 42 (3), 751-768.
Roscam Abbing, M. (2006).
Rembrandt 2006: the new Rembrandt Documents.
Leiden.
Rowlands, I., Nicholas, D., Williams, P., Huntington, P.,
Fieldhouse, M., Gunter, B., ...Tenopir, C. (2008, July). The Google generation: the information behaviour of the
researcher of the future. In Aslib
Proceedings (Vol. 60, No. 4, pp. 290-310). Emerald Group Publishing
Limited.
Russell-Rose, T., Lamantia, J.,Makri, S. (2014). Defining and Applying a Language for Discovery. In Adaptive Multimedia Retrieval: Semantics, Context, and
Adaptation (pp. 3-28). Springer International Publishing.
Sadeh, T. (2007). Time for a change: new approaches for a new generation of library
users. New Library World, 108 (7/8),
307-316.
Shokouhi, M.,Si, L.
(2011). Federated search. Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, 5(1), 1-102.
Sriram, S., Shen, X.,
Zhai, C. (2004, July). A session-based search
engine. In Proceedings of the 27th annual
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval (pp. 492-493). ACM.
Spink, A. (2002). A
user-centered approach to evaluating human interaction with web search
engines: an exploratory study. Information
processingmanagement, (3), 401-426.
Spink, A.,Jansen, B.
J. (2006). Searching multimedia federated content web
collections. Online Information Review,
30(5), 485-495.
Strauss, W.L. and
van der Meulen, M. (1979) The Rembrandt documents.
New York.
Tenopir, C.,
King, D. W., Spencer, J.,Wu, L. (2009). Variations
in article seeking and reading patterns of academics: What makes a
difference?. LibraryInformation Science
Research, (3), 139-148.
Trant, J. (2009). Tagging, folksonomy and art museums: Early experiments and ongoing
research. Journal of Digital
Information.
Tunkelang, D. (2009). Faceted search. Synthesis
lectures on information concepts, retrieval, and services, 1 (1),
1-80.
Van Waes, L. (2000). Thinking aloud as a method for testing the usability of
websites: the influence of task variation on the evaluation of
hypertext. Professional Communication, IEEE
Transactions on, 43(3), 279-291.
Verberne, S., Hinne, M., van der Heijden, M., Hoenkamp,
E., Kraaij, W., van der Weide, T.P. (2010). How does the
library searcher behave? A contrastive study of library search against
ad-hoc search. In: Braschler, M., Harman, D., Pianta, E. (eds.):
CLEF 2010 Labs and Workshops. Abstracts
Notebook Papers, CLEF 2010, p. 99
Vezzosi, M. (2009). Doctoral students' information behaviour: an exploratory study
at the University of Parma (Italy). New Library
World, 110(1/2), 65-80.
Voorhees, E. M. (2003). Overview of TREC 2003. In TREC (pp. 1-13).
Weiler, A. (2005). Information-seeking behavior in Generation Y students:
Motivation, critical thinking, and learning theory. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 31(1),
46-53.
White, R. W.,Drucker,
S. M. (2007, May). Investigating behavioral variability in
web search. In Proceedings of the 16th
international conference on World Wide Web (pp. 21-30). ACM.
Yee, K. P.,
Swearingen, K., Li, K.,Hearst, M. (2003, April). Faceted metadata for image search and browsing. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems (pp. 401-408). ACM.
Zorich, D. (2012). Transitioning to a Digital World: Art History, Its Research
Centers, and Digital Scholarship. Report to the
Samuel H. Kress Foundation and the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New
Media, George Mason University. Retrieved from http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-2/transitioning-to-a-digital-world-by-diane-zorich/


