Covers and Corpus wanted! Some Digital Humanities
                    Fragments 
Claire Clivaz
3 August 2016


1. I have appended separate annotations...
By commenting on his annotated edition of the Greek New Testament project from
the Vulgate, Erasmus claims in 1515 :
I have translated the whole New Testament after comparison with the Greek
copies, and have added the Greek on the facing pages, so that anyone may
easily compare it. I have appended separate annotations in which, partly by
argument and partly by the authority of the early Fathers, I show that my
emendations are not haphazard alterations, for fear that my changes might
not carry conviction and in the hope of preserving the corrected text from
further damage (Epist. 337, ll. 862–868; .
As the exegete Jan Krans explains, the last sentence shows that Erasmus considers
a text as remaining vulnerable and corruptible if it is not accompanied by a
commentary (#krans2006). Erasmus adopts the same attitude
in other passages: the text has to be accompanied by comments in order to be
read correctly or according to the intended sense. In other words, decades after
the invention of printing, Erasmus is still conditioned by the practices of
manuscript culture. His opinion reminds one of the famous Platonian passage in
the Phaedrus regarding the written discourse that
drifts all over the place [...and
is] unable to defend or help itself; Plato posits that speech is
superior to written text, since the former is: written with intelligence in the mind of the
learner (Plato, Phaedrus 275e and 276a,
(#yunis2003)). A long time before the
factishes of the sociologist Bruno Latour , written discourse acts here as an intermediate being that is unable to know
when it has to speak or to stay quiet and which is dominated by oral discourse.
This present article thus aims to consider written texts in the aforementioned
manner and by specifically analyzing the transformations of the
corpus and cover notions; then inquiring about what
happens to them in the digital turn. Are covers and the corpus
desegregating in the process of dépapérisation, the idea of
de-paperization according to the words of Jacques Derrida? The French
philosopher gave an illuminating interview in 1997 (French version):
Paper or me, you know…
(#derrida2005)
. Derrida compares “de-paperization” to the progressive shrinking of the
Wild Ass’s Skin by Balzac
This article aims to delve into this process of de-paperization, and
argues that the digital world does not represent only a loss of corporeality but
eminently introduces new tensions, encounters with the body, and ways of
collaboration. Part 2 serves firstly as a reminder that oral discourse and
visual cultures have been superseded by written discourse for only a relatively
short period of time within the Western framework. From Codex Zacynthius commentaries (6th century) to the five manuscripts of the Swiss novel by
Charles-Ferdinand Ramuz If the Sun Were Never to Return
(1937 1st edition), and the diverse Hamlet versions, I wish to recapture Western memory in
its never-ending practice of perpetual annotating, rewriting and versioning. The
inception of written material, its versioning as well as its relationship to
visual and oral materials, leads to the enlightenment of its interaction with
the topic of the body-corpus. Part 3 focuses on the relationship
between corporeality and the digital material of writing, pointing to a new
relationship between the body and the digital world. Finally, Part 4 will raise
the question of closures and limits; leading to the examination of notions of
anxiety as well as liberation.
The subtitle of this article includes Some Digital
Humanities fragments, the last word being a translation from the
French éclats, which can refer to fragments of wrath, light,
brilliance or something broken. This subtitle points to the fact that Humanities
is now present as fragments within digital culture. This process of Humanities’
fragmentation should draw Humanist scholars’ attention urgently to what the
literary scholar Yves Citton designates as the Humanities’ core duty:
interpretation. Considering Humanities as a social fact according to Latourian
inspiration, Citton expresses his own task thus: I would like to suggest that our knowledge
societies are worthy to be analyzed first of all as
interpretation cultures – and that to put at the forefront
questions of interpretation has to lead us to deeply reconsider our vision
of social interactions, as well as our knowledge mapping, the structuration
of our academic institutions and the expression of our politics claimings
(#citton2010)
A similar approach was also presented by the great DH scholar, Stefan Gradman at
the DH 2013 conference in Lincoln, Nebraska. Commenting on the EU project DM2E,
Gradman described the center of the Humanities field – including
corpora, metadata, social contexts, references and
dissemination/publication – as an interpretative modelisation
Stefan Gradman and Susan Schreibman, Beyond
Infrastructure: Further Modeling the Scholarly Domain, oral
presentation at the DH2013 in Lincoln (19/07/13). The expression is not
present in the published abstract (#schreibman2013).
Since interpretation is at stake, one should return to the beginning as Plato
suggests in Timaeus 48b: let us reconsider the
written discourse that drifts all over the
place [...and is] unable to defend or help itself (Plato, Phaedrus 275e), and thus put the interpretative process
at stake whilst looking for the fragments of digitized Humanities.
2. This discourse which is written with intelligence in the mind of the
learner: Telling and Listening as Parts of our Writings.
In 2012, Clivaz et al. underlined that the mass-scholarization of the 19th century led to the supremacy of printed literacy
over other forms (#furet). This supremacy
was however, rather short: between 1850 and 1980. This period is accompanied by
the notable decline of the rhetorics in Germany and France, when rhetorical
teaching at high schools and universities stopped, specifically in 1897 in
France (#belhoste1977). In Germany, the work of Lucian of Samosata
– a famous representative of Greek rhetoric historical writing– was withdrawn from high school teaching in 1857
(#baumbach2002). Instead, Leopold von Ranke, the father of
German historicism in contrast to Lucian, provided the basis of annoying and
farblos historical writing . He contrasted historical communication with rhetoric and the use
of pathos. In a 1964-1965 seminar titled L’Ancienne
rhétorique, Roland Barthes emblematically presented rhetoric as
already limited to memory and to the archives (#barthes1970). From
that moment on, oral culture seems to have been almost totally forgotten in
European historical and literary studies. This was to the profit of written
texts that were considered potential containers for all that which is semiotic
and thereby able to differentiate reality from the fictional.
Since the 1950s in the USA, oral cultures have recaptured scholars’ interest,
notably in certain historical and sociological research areas. During this
period, a preoccupation with oral history appeared alongside two other
developments: research focused on the elites and institutions (Columbia School);
and on marginal populations (Chicago School). These developments aided the
emergence of alternative and hidden histories as well as their transmission by
orality (Descamps, 2005). This return to orality is also present in the study of
the notion of literacy, notably in the work of Walter Ong . These approaches have contributed to the development of a growing attention
to plural literacies in the Human and Social Sciences. Yves Citton evokes these
plural literacies in a Le Monde article in the
following manner: In a literature
classroom, the point is to share the audacious gesture of interpretation, in
the presence of the historical collective that makes us interpreters. It is
related to the theatric or choreographic performance, or to the sportive
performance, but also to the mystical initiation. [...] The interpretative
gesture can be ‘performed’ only in the present .
A look back in history shows that the performed work seems obvious in
Antiquity, a cultural framework where orality is dominant, as the following
musical example demonstrates. The rhetor Dio Chrysostomus (2nd century CE) speaks about Homeric music
(musike), whereas his modern editor translates this
as Homeric poetry
(#crosby1946). Crosby, in the first part of the
20th century, is unable to conceive that the
Homeric work was predominantly music to ancient ears. Ancient culture and
texts are full of musical indications that underline its importance, as shown in
an a contrario way by Socrates’s ironic remark on public singers
(the rhaposdes) and the actors who seem the be the authentic wise men
(Plato, Ion 532d). In fact, the recurrent Platonic
attacks on poetry, and arts in general, underline their importance; Plato
himself uses assonance games, and rythmus with long
sillabi (Plato, Laws 764de). Such
a phenomenon can be observed even in the in Rev 18,22a or Rev 14,2, where Paolo
Garuti considers the etymological word games as an attempt to reproduce
something of the cithara sounds. He concludes that such phenomena belong to the
cultural encyclopedia of that time: music was present in words and minds .
It is more surprising – at least for scholars working on Antiquity, who often
present an amnesia regarding the 16th and 17th centuries – to consider the impact of oral
performance on the manuscripts of the Shakespearian Hamlet. Such amnesia has a powerful impact on the way in which one
considers authorship in our present digital culture. If the old audience
of Humanist scholars was trained to focus on relatively narrow historical
periods, the new audience of Humanist PhD students, whatever they choose as
topic, should be trained to obtain a deep knowledge of the history of authorship
and of the writing material, from the roll to the screen. If one needs to be
further convinced thereof, the Shakespearian case of Hamlet’s composition history is surely a good argument. Paul Eggert
has recently presented a synthesis of the situation of the first three editions
of the printed play dating from 1603, 1604-1605 and 1623. The first version is
probably an adaptation of a play performed on the 26th July 1602, reconstructed from memory by the actors of the play and
written to be sold to an editor, Nicholas Ling . The longer versions, however, notably the second, could be
literary versions destined to be read rather than to be performed . In other words, Shakespeare had a genuine
concern for his literary reputation and took care of it, a fact that has been
claimed by many scholars since the 1980s. One is able to verify here the
influence of spoken discourse on printed literature. Whereas the theatric
performance influenced the most ancient version of the text, the aggregate
formed by public discourse regarding the author has affected the longer
versions. Shakespeare was apparently influenced by the diffuse presence of the
public discourse on him. Borrowing from the terminology of the literary critic
Jérôme Meizoz, one may say that this influence represented the trace of the
literary postures in the middle of the 17th century (#meizoz2007). Such a notion is confirmed in
the following statement by the Shakespearian scholar Lukas Erne: the first people who had a vested
interest in the rise of dramatic authorship were not the playwrights
themselves but the London printers, publishers, and booksellers eager to
render respectable and commercially profitable what was initially an
enterprise with little or no prestige
(#erne2013)
The impact of others’ discourses – readers, commentators, newspapers and people
in the street – on a printed text can be consistently traced: they influenced
Erasmus and his annotations, as well as Shakespeare and his diverse rewritings.
Even before printing, manuscript culture offered numerous traces of this impact.
Let’s consider the Codex Zacynthius (6th century, palimpsest), where the Gospel according
to Luke appears in the middle of pages whose margins are full of patristic
commentaries. Certain folios even present two different versions of the Gospel
text, one in the center of the page and the other inside the commentaries.
However, in 1861, the modern editor Tregelles was chosen to edit only the
central version of the text while ignoring the alternative versions present in
the commentaries (#parker2009). Such an editorial
attitude, whose impact was valorized from Plato to Erasmus, leads to loose
information and to the neglect of the commentaries – these
annotations. Yet such was the printed literacy at its height
that it believed it had the right to prune the architext, to return to
Genette terminology: it believed it had the right to select, choose, and cut
beneath the cover and the front-page, the page de garde. The
French phrase page de garde designates the front-page of a
book that has the task of being a guard: if we are to discard the
protection offered by a book’s cover and the guarding duty of the
front-page, are we losing something in digital writing? One can answer that the
capacity to consider textuality beyond the boundaries of the cover and
front-page was already present in Genette when he was describing the poetic
object as the architext, as a network of excellence:
the architext is, then,
everywhere – above, beneath, around the text, which spins its web only
by hooking it here and there onto that network of architexture
(#genette1992)
.
If one considers the manuscripts and printed texts of Charles-Ferdinand Ramuz
from the 20th century, one may estimate that
annotation and rewriting practices never stopped completely. In the 27th and most recent volume of the complete works of
Ramuz, a computing tool allows the reader to compare the five versions of If the Sun Were Never to Return, dating from 1937 to
1942 (#sernier2013). The readers now have to explain whether they
have read a version of If the Sun Were Never to
Return from 1937, 1939, 1940, 1941, or 1942. Such a perspective
unbinds the work from the book to make several versions or steps. The
fluctuating text plays with the guard of the front-page. The
cinematographic version by Claude Goretta (1987) occupies its own space as yet
another version in a universe of plural literacies: it is the 1987 version of
If the Sun Were Never to Return See the
website that presents the Swiss moovie If the Sun Were
Never to Return,
http://www.swissfilms.ch/fr/film_search/filmdetails/-/id_film/2146533716
(last accessed on 10/13/2015).. With respect to the form, one is able
to verify here what Wido van Peursen refers to as constitutive of the digital
culture: the text is perceived as a document . In the middle of digitalized documents, unbound
from their statuses as unique works, emerges the question of content
communication; to communicate a
thought, as an interviewer asked Derrida in 1997 during a seminal
interview about the function of paper:
To what extent has [the paper]
been adequate for you to communicate your thinking?
(#derrida2005)
.
3. Losing the body-corpus?
Before answering this question about the adequacy of paper to relate one’s
thoughts, Jacques Derrida propounds an impressive perspective on the
paper-body: Ever since I
started writing, both the institution and the stability of paper have been
constantly exposed to seismic shake-ups. The beasts of relentless writing
that we are could not remain either deaf or insensitive to this. Every sign
on the paper had to be picked up as an advance sign: it foretold the
loss of a support: the end of the subjectile is nigh. That
is also, doubtless, where this body of paper has a bodily hold on us .
Holding on to this paper-body perspective, this current section of the
article will underline how Derrida frames this notion of fragmented textuality
as a bodily disconnection within our digital age. Relying on the shrinking of
The Wild Ass’s Skin, he discusses the
inexorable shrinking of this hyletic material, recalling that the Greek
ule also means hood, forest and
material
(#derrida2005). How could the biblical scholars – to whom
I belong – not be sensitive to what happens here, knowing that the word
Bible itself supports notions of writing: papyrus is accorded the
name bublos,, which refers to a plant named in the Lebanese
region of the ancient city of Bublos. If one considers liber
or
caudex, these Latin words also refer to the vegetal domain,
specifically to the hood as represented by both parts of a book’s cover
which maintain the folios inside. As Derrida summarizes it: Paper is utilized in an experience involving the body,
beginning with hands, eyes, voice, ears; so it mobilizes both time and space
(#derrida2005)
process could affect a certain writing, warns Derrida: Can we speak then of abandon, arrest, or
inhibition when designating the ongoing withdrawal or decline of a certain
kind of writing: particularly the decline of steely writing with the point
of a pen on the surface of paper, the decline of the hand, or at any rate of
a specific and unique way of using the hand? If we were to associate this
withdrawal with an effectual untying, namely the untying that effectively
undoes the symbolic link of writing to walking. Thereby moving along,
breaking a path, and untying the plotted connections between eyes, hands,
and feet, then perhaps we would be dealing with the symptoms of another
historical-, or as some would perhaps say, a posthistorical-phase. At any
rate, another epoch could be hanging in the balance: keeping us in suspense,
carrying off another scene, another scenario, keeping us distanced from, and
raised above paper; all this according to another model of the prohibited.
Therein lies a form of anxiety within the agenda .
Seventeen years later, this anxiety is what is really at stake in public opinion.
The USA has stopped teaching cursive writing to children , whereas French newspapers misunderstood this news and transmitted it as
the end of handwriting at
school(#luteaud2013) See also Le Courrier international : La fin de l’écriture
1194 (18 septembre 2013). See also my blog La vengance
de la gommette 2 : ne pas trop vite crier au loup !, http://claireclivaz.hypotheses.org/348 (last accessed on
10/13/2015).. Taking Derrida into consideration as he imagined the
shrinking of only a certain writing, but not without also conceiving this
moment as the earthquake that is
happening sometimes leads to losing one’s head or loss of
sense
(#derrida2005). Perhaps it is worth recalling that
western cultural memory does not stop to say it in a myriad of ways: body and
books were jointly liable. With this in mind, one should examine the figure of
Melany the Young, Christian literate in the fourth century CE. The life of Saint
Melany, beyond the hagiographical tone, represents an interesting testimony on
various aspects: individual consciousness, the form of books, the reading
practices and the spiritual cross around the object of the book
(#gorce1962). Married at the age of fourteen (§1), Melany risked
death during the birth of her second child (§5), and at twenty years old,
reached an agreement with her husband so that she could live in chastity (§6).
The pretext was an imperative need to devote herself to God but evidently Melany
focused on an intellectual and ascetic life; reading everything she found and
copying the Old and New Testaments several times per year (§26). She also wrote
small booklets called somatioi, little
bodies (§23 and 36). There is a clear symbolic exchange: whereas
Melany’s body stopped making children, she translated her fecundity to these
little bodies that she wrote. This relationship between body and
manuscript can be seen throughout the entire history of the codex, as animal
skin parchments exemplify. One can here refer to the thorough reading by
Emmanuèle Baumgartner (1999).
One needs to consider the size of the loss, of the shrinking of this
paper-body. After a moment of nostalgic reflection, one can then look
closely at the next wave growing on the horizon: the new bindings, dependencies,
hybrids and paradoxical relationships between the body and the digital material
of writing. To consider the Digital Humanities for what they are or could be,
one has to let them walk at their own rhythms. Humanities is done with
fingers, according the Latin word digitus. Thus, one may refer to
the hand-machine interface that one sees with the finger-print scanning on the
iPhone 5SSee the Youtube video Hands on with iPhone
5S Touch ID fingerprint scanner. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lfIDSx2OHgQ (last accessed on
10/15/15). or by discovering words with the top of the fingers as a Swiss
newspaper titled the DH project EPFL-Venice (#fabre2013).
With symbolic and semantic sensitivity, Robert Darnton related the German word
Fingerspitzengefühl – to be able to discover the world in
details with the top of the fingers – to the emergence of digital screens:
We find our way through the world
by means of a sensory disposition that the Germans call
Fingerspitzengefühl. If you were trained to guide a pen
with your finger index, look at the way young people use their thumbs on
mobile phones, and you will see how technology penetrates a new generation,
body and soul (#darton2009)
Even breath can lead us to a surprising body-machine dialogue as we noticed in a
new form of multi-media publication, the eTalk, that we are developing as an
interdisciplinary team in Lausanne: the software, Audacity, shares the discourse
of a scholar in small pieces by following the rhythmus of their breath.
Sentences in the eTalk are replaced by another measure: breaths that
share the discourse in small pieces of 2-3 sentences each . In other words, the digital world does not
represent only a loss of corporeality but, as previously stated, eminently
introduces new ways of collaboration, tensions, and encounters with the body,
with amazing new medical and IT findings such as the creation of an artificial
skin. See for example this blog of synthesis by Justin Alford on an
artificial skin (http://www.iflscience.com/technology/smart-artificial-skin-could-give-prosthetic-limbs-feeling;
last accessed on 10/15/15). If the body is at stake in a digital
culture (#clivaz2015b), the questions of closure and delimitation
– notions so important in order to avoid a complete dissemination leading to
madness – remain necessary and have to be reconfigured. It is thus an area of
focus that requires examination.
4. Towards closure and delimitation: the capture as challenge.
How will we react to the anxiety provoked by the loss of the relationship
between body and paper or by the so-called end of handwriting teaching?
Temporally speaking, our first reaction when faced with an out of the
book textuality collapsing into an infinite architexture would
have been to develop a new form of scribal elitist culture with the most
sophisticated methods of electronic encoding. Is this compatible with real DH
dissemination? One would hope to see more efforts made in this direction of
dissemination. Let us compare Wikipedia in its English and French versions:
Wikipedia.fr allows anyone to write and upload an article without requiring
basic HTML5 encoding thanks to a visual editor, whereas Wikipedia.org
requires HTML5 knowledge to modify a page or to create an article. See for
Wikipedia.org guidelines : https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:HTML_in_wikitext (last
accessed on 10/15/15); see for Wikipedia.fr guidelines, with the choic of
the visual editor, or the HTML5 editor: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aide:Comment_modifier_une_page_en_wikicode
(last accessed on 10/15/15). With the introduction of a visual
editor, it has been almost effortless to write an article on French Wikipedia.
This is not a mere detail: it provides a way for allowing wider DH
dissemination, resulting in the means to enroll a wide audience in the
wiki process. The University of Geneva (CH) has started to organize
open workshops to encourage and train women to contribute to the French
Wikipedia’s articles: the possibility to circumvent HTML5 encoding allows
contributors to reach diverse audiences and to raise the level of DH
dissemination. Swiss news, 10/11/15 : the University of Geneva (CH)
organizes Wikipedia training workshops for women : http://www.rts.ch/play/tv/19h30/video/wikipedia-compte-tres-peu-de-collaboratrices?id=7159067(last
accessed on 10/15/15). Time will tell how the situation evolves; as
yet Wikipedia.org is still untransformed.
The emergence of a new scribal culture will not be a guarantee to us
rediscovering the possibility of closures and delimitations. To recapture the
notion of a limit, one should imagine the process in three steps. First, we have
to keep in mind that manuscripts and printed cultures were also able to foster
fear – fear of being overwhelmed by books and paper. The end of the Gospel
according to John 21.25 claims that the world would not be able to contain
everything that could be written about Jesus’ stories, reflecting an anxiety
regarding a written knowledge able to absorb the world. Ann Blair, in Too Much to Know, refreshes one’s mind by helping one
to escape the academic amnesia related to the 16th-17th centuries: she pleads for us to
use the term information age anachronistically in a non technical way,
underlining the idea that information management has accompanied the
birth of the printed book (#blair2010). She reminds
us that historians have pointed
especially to three main sources of information explosion in the
Renaissance: the discovery of new worlds, the recovery of ancient texts, and
the proliferation of printed books
(#blair2010); in her book she expands this point
of view with examples from cultures with limited or no contact with Western
Europe. Such an approach, opening the historical gates to a thoroughgoing
perspective, beyond Western cultures, is absolutely necessary to facing the
anxiety one can face today. The building of a bridge between old
audiences and new audiences is required. Such a platform offers a
stable ground that one may move with Derrida from anxiety to the feeling of
out-of-paper liberation that he expresses so strongly in the
conclusion of his interview: Because on the other hand, I also suffer, to the point of suffocation, from
too much paper, and this is another spleen. Another
ecological sigh. How can we save the world from paper? And its
own body? So I also dream of living paperless – and sometimes
that sounds to my ears like a definition or real life, of the living
part of life. [...] Let’s not count the books. So paper expels me – outside
my home. It chases me off. This time, it’s an aut aut: paper
or me.
(#derrida2005)
Firstly, we can also find a sense of liberation when one goes out of the
paper. Secondly, one has to bravely assume that the objectivation of
knowledge allowed by paper is ending. From the Modern duality of subject-object
succeeds an era of intersubjectivity, of networking and graphs. The
responsibility of subjects to transport knowledge and culture is increasingly at
stake in such a digital framework. If Fahrenheit
451 by Ray Bradbury was a science-fiction novel in 1953, it sounds
really less like that today. In particular it illustrates how much our own
bodies are the covers of what we know and we transmit today. By surfing on the
waters of the web, it is eminently our responsibility to define, enclose
and limit the pieces of knowledge we still want to keep, preserve and transmit.
In printed culture, we had the secure boundaries of chapter, word, phrase,
line, elements that allowed us to consider texts as massively addressable [objects] at different levels
of scale
(#witmore2010). Yet, as in the manuscript culture of the first
centuries C.E., even these boundaries are not mandatory guarantees in the
digital architexture ocean.
In consequence, a third step needs to be taken. It is surely not enough to
innovate by shrinking (#goulet)creative
fury according to Citton’s statement: to improve intelligence and make the world
evolve
(#citton2010)creative
fury, we can once more solicit the reserves of Western historical memory
and return to the 17th century. To conclude, one may
borrow the excellent remarks made by Olivier Abel, Ethics professor at the
Protestant Institute of Theology (Montpellier/Paris), concerning the buccaneers
of this century and the capture anthropology that emerges from this
particular style of life. Olivier Abel underlines that: The time of the buccaneers was particularly flourishing
in the Caribbean between 1630 and 1670. In the new worlds, everything is
offered with profusion by the divine Providence. [...] We are not in a gift
and exchange economy any more, but in an economy of the capture, that
stands even in the title of the Dutch philosopher Grotius On the Right of Capture. The history tempest has
broken all links, and the pirate ship stands for the multi-religious and
multi-racial utopia of a free adhesion, after the tempest, even if one
adopts rules harder, as in an anti-reality.
The 17th century, with this focus on Grotius’ notion
of the right of capture forms a link to this article’s Part 2; it thus
proves fruitful to consider our digital transformation. Indeed, in 2011, Johanna
Drucker made the now-famous proposition to switch from the notion of data
to capta:
Differences in the etymological
roots of the terms data and capta make the distinction between
constructivist and realist approaches clear. Capta is
taken actively while data is assumed to be a
given able to be recorded and observed. From this
distinction, a world of differences arises. Humanistic inquiry
acknowledges the situated, partial, and constitutive character of
knowledge production, the recognition that knowledge is constructed,
taken, not simply given as a natural representation of
pre-existing fact.
(#drucker2011)
The notion of capta can be related to the seldom-used French word
capitation, which means to capture a part of heritage or some
money. See the definition of the French dictionary Larousse, http://www.larousse.fr/dictionnaires/francais/captation/13011(last
accessed on 10/15/15). Whatever it is on the digital ocean, or on the
17th century’s oceans, the act of capture seems
to be the one required by new open spaces and thence to grasp some parts of our
cultural heritage.
After describing such an atmosphere, Abel pursues his analysis in another
article, arguing that out in the ocean there is neither king nor pope any more,
one stands alone with God, one has left everything behind. Forced to live
everyday without knowing what will come in the next, one quickly learns that it
is impossible to possess the sea, to keep it in one’s fingers. Nevertheless,
seafaring individuals are so unbound that they can contract new alliances, free
alliances:
the right to depart is the
condition of the capacity to be bound. The political question will thus
gradually become: How can we stay together? when we can always
become unbound?
(#abel2009b)
.
Everything is said in the notion of: the right to depart is the condition of the capacity to be bound.
To exit the cover – to depart for lawless regions of the ocean – provides the
right to leave, to depart. Since textuality has now – literally speaking – the
right to depart from the book, it can also contract free alliances, with images,
sounds, and all the other forms of texts. During the 17th century, since on the
ocean everything is going unbound, ceaselessly, one has to reconsider what
are moorings, ropes, ties, knots and pacts
(#abel2009a). Today this is the role of new technologies
– to give us the right to break free from the bindings and the front-pages of
printed culture. This is an obligation, one could say, because it is impossible
to possess the Internet ocean, to keep it inside of our fingers, inside our
humanity. The right to capture, harvest, and select becomes the condition to
bind, delimit and draw a virtual cover. Humanities out of the book, unbound, may
force us to go on board! All our ways to net-work and to
bind will be then have to be reconsidered.
Acknowledgments
With the kind permission of the editors, this English article is based on the
translation of a forthcoming French article by Clivaz, C., En quête des couvertures et corpus. Quelques éclats d’humanités
digitales. In Carayol Valerie, Morandi Franc (eds.), Le Tournant Numérique des Sciences Humaines et
Sociales, Pessac, MSHA, 2015, p. 97-109. The author reformulated
some sentences and expanded some passages in this English version. Many thanks
are due to Harley Edwards for the English proof reading of this article. I am
also very grateful to the two anonymous reviewers who brought important
suggestions for improvements as well as rich bibliographical references to this
article.


Olivier Abel. L’océan, le puritain, le pirate,
Esprit 356 (2009), 104–10.
Olivier Abel. Essai sur la prise. Anthropologie de la flibuste et théologie radicale
protestante,
Esprit 356 (2009b), 114–15; http://olivierabel.fr/nuit-ethique-les-cultures-et-le-differend/pirates-puritains.php
(last accessed on 10/15/15). With Olivier Abel’s permission, the online version
is quoted, rather than the printed one, since I prefer it.
Roland Barthes. L’ancienne rhétorique. Aide-mémoire.
Communications 16 (1970), 172–223.
Manuel Baumbach. Lukian in Deutschland. Eine Forschungs-und
Rezeptionsgeschichtliche Analyse vom Humanismus bis zur Gegenwart
(Beihefte zu Poetica 25). Munich: Verlag
Wilhelm Fink, 2002.
Emmanuèle Baumgarnter,
Du manuscrit retrouvé au corps retrouvé. In
Le Topos du manuscrit trouvé. Actes du colloque
international Louvain-Gand, 22-23-24 mai 1997 [hommage à Christian
Angelet]. Edited by Jan Hermann, Fernand Hallyn and Kris Peeters. Leuven:
Peeters, 1999, 1-14.
Ann Blair. Too
Much to Know. Yale: Yale University Press, 2010. Kindle
edition.
Bruno Belhoste, L’enseignement secondaire français et les sciences au début du
XXe siècle. La réforme de 1902 des plans
d’études et des programmes.
Revue d’histoire des sciences 43 (1977):
371–400.
Yves Citton. L’Avenir des Humanités. Économie de la connaissance ou culture de
l’interprétation ?. Paris: La Découverte, 2010. Kindle
edition.
Yves Citton, Transmettre les textes ne se limite pas à transférer des
connaissances.
Le Monde, 21 mars 2013. http://www.lemonde.fr/idees/article/2013/03/21/transmettre-les-textes-ne-se-limite-pas-a-transferer-des-connaissances_1852037_3232.html
(last accessed on 03/15/2015).
Claire Clivaz, Jérôme Meizoz,
François Vallotton and Joseph Verheyden, with Benjamin Bertho. Reading Tomorrow. From Ancient Manuscripts to the Digital
Era / Lire Demain. Des manuscrits antiques à l’ère digitale.
Lausanne: PPUR, 2012.
Claire Clivaz, Marion
Rivoal and Martial Sankar. A New Platform for Editing
Digital Multimedia: The eTalks. In New Avenues for Electronic Publishing in the Age of Infinite
Collections and Citizen Science: Scale. Edited by Birgit
Schmidt and Milena Dobreva. Openness and Trust, Amsterdam (The authors and IOS
Press), 2015, 156–159 ; DOI : 10.3233/978-1-61499-562-3-156 ; http://ebooks.iospress.nl/publication/40894(last accessed on
10/15/15).
Claire Clivaz. Mais où est le corps? L’homme augmenté comme lieu des Humanités
Digitales. In L’homme augmenté
(eTalks). Edited by Philippe Bornet, Claire Clivaz, Nicole Durisch
Gauthier and Etienne Honoré. VITAL-DH, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 2015.
http://etalk2.vital-it.ch/?dir=Clivaz#0(last accessed 10/15/15).
Dion Chrysostomus. On Homer. Discourse 53,7. In Dio
Chrysostom. Edited by Lamar Crosby, Volume 4. Cambridge/Londres:
Harvard University Press, 1946, 362–63.
Robert Darnton. The Case for Books: Past, Present, Future. New York: PublicAffairs,
2009.
Jacques Derrida, Paper of me, You Know… (New Speculations on a Luxury of the
Poor.) In Paper Machine, 2nd ed. Edited by Jacques Derrida. Translated by the
Board of Trustees (Stanford). Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2005, 41–65;
http://users.clas.ufl.edu/burt/Derridapaperorme.pdf (last accessed on
10/15/15).
Florence Descamps. L’Historien, l’archiviste et le magnétophone (Histoire économique XIXe-XXe siècle). Paris: Comité pour l’histoire économique et
financière de la France/IGPDE, 2005. http://books.openedition.org/igpde/438 (last accessed on
10/15/15).
Jen Doll, Cursive
May Die, But We’ll Talk About It Endlessly First.
The Atlantic Wire, 9 juillet 2012; http://www.theatlanticwire.com/entertainment/2012/07/cursive-may-die-well-talk-about-it-endlessly-first/54337/
(last accessed on 10/15/15).
Johanna Drucker, Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display.
DHQ 5.1 (2011): http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/1/000091/000091.html
Paul Eggert. Apparatus, text, interface: how to read a printed critical edition.
In Cambridge Companion to Textual Scholarship.
Edited by Neil Fraistat and Julia Flanders. Cambridge (MA): Cambridge Unviersity
Press, 2013, 97–118.
Desiderius Erasmus, Opus epistolarum Des. Erasmi Roterodami / denuo recognitum et
auctum per P. Allen, H.M. Allen, H. W. Garrod, vol. II, Oxonii : in
Typ. Clarendoniano, 1910.
Lukas Erne, Shakespeare as Literary Dramatist. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2013. Second kindle edition.
Joëlle Fabre, Le
monde au bout des doigts. Humanités Digitales. Ressusciter le passé est
l’une des promesses du savoir numérisé.
24Heures, 12 September 2013, 36.
François Furet and
Jacques Ozouf. Lire et écrire. La scolarisation des
Français de Calvin à Jules Ferry. Paris: Minuit, 1977.
Paolo Garuti. Cultes et (natu-)culture dans l’Apocalypse de Jean: les emprunts à
l’imagerie d’origine hellénistique, romaine ou indo-iranienne comme
phénomène de perception de la nature.
Angelicum 90 (2013), 57–86.
Gérard Genette. The Architext. An Introduction. Translated by Jane E.
Lewin. Berkeley, Los Angeles and Oxford: University of California Press,
1992.
Denys Gorce. Vie
de Sainte Mélanie (SC 90), Paris,
Éditions du Cerf, 1962.
Frédéric Goulet and
Dominique Vinck. L’innovation par retrait. Contribution à
une sociologie du détachement.
Revue française de sociologie 53/3
(2009), 195–224.
Jan Krans, Beyond
What Is Written: Erasmus and Beza as Conjectural Critics of the New
Testament (NTTS 35). Leiden /
Boston: Brill, 2006.
Bruno Latour, On
the Modern Cult of the Factish Gods (Science
and Cultural Theory). Duke: Duke University Press, 2010.
Bénédicte Luteaud. Apprendre à écrire ne sera plus obligatoire dans les écoles de
45 États américains.
Quoi.info, 21 février 2013; http://quoi.info/actualite-education/2013/02/21/apprendre-a-ecrire-a-lecole-bientot-demode-1161153/
(last accessed on 10/15/15).
Jérôme Meizoz. Postures littéraires I et II. Genève, Slatkine, 2007
and 2011.
Walter Ong. Orality
and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. New York: Routledge,
2002.
David Parker. The Date of Codex Zacynthius (Ξ): A New Proposal. In Manuscripts, Texts, Theology. Collected Papers
1977-2007 (ANTT 40). Edited by David
Parker. Berlin/New York: Walter de Gruyter, 2009, 113–19.
Wido van Peursen. Text Comparison and Digital Creativity: An
Introduction. In Text Comparison and Digital
Creativity. The Production of Presence and Meaning in Digital Text
Scholarship (Scholarly Communication
1). Edited by Wido van Peursen, Ernst D. Thoutenhoofd and Adrian Van der Weel.
Brill, Leiden, 2010, 1–27.
Leopold von Ranke, Geschichte der Germanischen Völker. Fürsten und Völker die Geschichte der
romanischen und germanischen Völker von 1494 bis 1514. Genève:
Wiesbaden, Emil Vollmer Verlag, 2000.
Lucian of Samosata. Comment il faut écrire l’histoire (La roue à livres 55). Edited by André Husrt. Paris:
Les Belles Lettres, 2010.
Emilien Sernier, C.F. Ramuz, Œuvres complètes vol. 27: Romans
(1932-1937).
Fabula 28 août 2013. http://www.fabula.org/actualites/cf-ramuz-oeuvres-completes-vol-27-romans-1932-1937_58276.php
(last accessed on 10/15/15).
Susan Schreibman, Stefan
Gradmann, Steffen Hennicke, Tobias Blanke, Sally Chambers, et. al. (2013). http://dh2013.unl.edu/abstracts/files/downloads/DH2013_conference_abstracts_print.pdf
Beyond Infrastructure – Modelling Scholarly Research and
Collaboration. In Digital Humanities 2013:
Conference Abstracts, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, USA, 16-19
July 2013, 386-389.
Michael Witmore, Text: A Massively Addressable Object. In Wine Dark Sea blog. 3rd
Decembre 2011, http://winedarksea.org/?p=926(last accessed on 10/15/15).
Harvey Yunis, Writing for Reading. Thucydides, Plato, and the Emergence of the Critical
Reader. In Written Texts and the Rise of
Literate Culture in Ancient Greece. Edited by Harvey Yunis.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003, 189-212.

