It is time to address the Public Communication of DH
Julianne Nyhan
9 September 2016


The problem of DH in the mainstream media
Criticism of Digital Humanities (DH) is nothing new. This was often alluded to by
those who participated in the oral history interviews that were carried out as
part of the Hidden Histories of computing in the Humanities
project, 1949-present
(#nyhan2015). For example, Rockwell reflected on the various types
of opposition his work met with at an earlier stage of his career. He recalled
being asked: Why are [you] running
computing classes? This is like Pencils in the Humanities. ... [I
also heard] you guys are
intellectually lightweight [and encountered] blatant sarcasm and ignorance
(#rockwell2012). Indeed, numerous references to such opposition
can be found in the literature of the field. The newsletter of the Association for Computers and the Humanities (ACH) is
particularly intriguing in this regard. For example, Mary Dee Harris (then
President of ACH) wrote:
In 1970 I was accused of trying to
destroy literature and now the 1984 MLA Convention Program
lists 10 meetings devoted to Computer Assisted Instruction and
Research... It is an indication of the changing times...the profession
has largely accepted computers as a part of the discipline...even though
not everyone is involved in using computers, they are no longer viewed
as threatening.
(#harris1984)

Hopeful as Harris was, it is clear that DH is once again viewed as
threatening. This is evidenced by a flurry of essays and opinion
pieces that have appeared over the last few years in publications with far
greater reach than the typical academic journal. Kirsch, writing in the New Republic, portrays DH as a disorganised and
ineffectual amalgam that is as unable to define itself as convincingly
demonstrate that it can create new knowledge. Such ineptitude notwithstanding,
Kirsch goes on to argue that DH poses an existential threat to the Humanities.
The revolutionary rhetoric that often accompanies DH has an
undertone of menace, the threat of
historical illegitimacy and obsolescence
(#kirsch2014)
. So too he depicts the (implicitly) distinctive and expansive modus
operandi of DH — where building and tool-making tend to be viewed on par with
thinking and writing, and where images can be used to communicate, critique or
collaborate with words — as chillingly unpropitious:
In this vision, the very idea of
language as the basis of a humane education — even of human identity —
seems to give way to a post- or pre-verbal discourse of pictures and
objects. Digital humanities becomes another name for the obsequies of
humanism
(#kirsch2014)
. The instrumentalist and results-orientated nature that is supposed of DH
is reiterated once more in the closing line as Humanists are warned to guard
against the decoy that is DH because
[t]he danger is that they will
wake up one morning to find that they have sold their birth right for a
mess of apps
(#kirsch2014)
.
The allegedly reductionist and anti-Humanities nature of DH is invoked in
articles in various other mainstream publications too. O’Connell, writing in the
The New Yorker remarks: As far as I could tell, there was a general
skepticism about the digital humanities, combined with a certain measure of
unease — arising, perhaps, from the vague aura of utility, even of outright
science, emanating from the discipline, and the sense that this aura was
attracting funding that might otherwise have gone to more low-tech
humanities projects. (#oconnell2014)
Writing in The Los Angeles Review of Books in 2012,
Marche castigated DH as part of the creeping, and seemingly inexorable,
computerisation of all aspects of our lives, when he argued that literature is not data
(#marche2012). This is a thread that was again taken up in an
article in The New York Times that, ostensibly at
least, positioned itself as a supporter of DH. Chillingly, we here find that its
promise is characterised as
the transformation of the
humanities into science. By science I mean using numbers to test
hypotheses
(#leroi2015)
. Not only does the article reduce DH to a discipline that is exclusively
concerned with quantitative methods but, in contrast with the Humanities, it is
depicted as one that deploys such methods in a completely neutral and
non-hermeneutic way: It’s easy to see
how it will go. A traditional, analog, scholar will make some claim about
the origin, fate or significance of some word, image, trope or theme in some
Great Work. He’ll support it with apt quotations, and fillet the canon for
more of the same. His evidence will be the sort that natural scientists call
anecdotal — but that won’t worry him since he’s not doing
science. ... But then a code-capable graduate student will download the
texts — not just the canon, but a thousand more — run the algorithms,
produce the graphs, estimate the p values, and show the claim to be false,
if false it indeed is. There will be no rejoinder; the analog scholar won’t
even know how to read the results. Quantification has triumphed in field
after field of the natural and social sciences. It will here, too.

I could enumerate various other examples of such articles; however, my point is,
I hope, beginning to emerge. In the mainstream media DH is frequently depicted
as a threat to the Humanities and as an instrumentalist and theoretically-naïve
endeavour. Furthermore, it is also frequently depicted in a way that few of
those who work in DH are likely to be able to relate to. This was often
reflected in the social media conversations that followed the publication of
such pieces
and
Twitter discussions that took place after the publication of some of the
articles discussed above. In response to (#leroi2015), Barker
tweeted This article would be better
entitled misunderstanding the digital humanities (Feb 18).
In the main, the replies from within the DH community have tended to focus on the
respective articles’ shortcomings. For example, Schnapp et al’s response to
Kirsch emphasizes the logical flaws, oversights and factual errors that the
article contains. They argue that he has an impoverished understanding of the
scholarship of the history of the book, that he accords New Criticism a vim that
has long departed it and they briefly touch on his misrepresentation of the aims
and practices of DH (#schnapp2014). Such responses are important
and necessary. However, they do not go far enough or recognize the more
fundamental issue that I believe to be at stake, namely the discipline’s current
shortcomings in the context of what we might think of as the Public
Communication of DH and the necessity of approaching this in a more
systematic and expert way, as I will now argue.
Reflecting on Popular Depictions of DH
By my lights, the most telling aspects of the articles discussed above are that
they (i) do not accurately describe the aims or scholarship of DH (ii) are
written by people who are not experts in DH and (iii) appear in mainstream media
with large readerships. That the second and third points are true should be a
matter for concern because they emphasize that DH does not currently have a
place at the table of mainstream media communication. In short, the
communication of what our discipline does, has done and aims to do is being left
to others who are not necessarily expert in it.
That the first point should be true is immensely puzzling when one considers the
very many contributions that have been written on the topic What is DH?
(see, for example, (#terras2013) and less formal explorations such
as the Day of Digital Humanities
(#rockwell2012b)
Of course, one might counter that authors such as Kirsch are referencing wider
discourses about neoliberalisation and, far from misunderstanding DH, they are
intentionally misrepresenting it as a handmaiden of those who seek to
commercialise higher education. I’ll return to this point later. For now, I want
to counter it by recalling the many references that one can find to how poorly
DH is understood outside of expert circles, for example,
As such, digital humanities is
the consummate academic hot-button topic: Everyone has vehement
opinions, but few actually know what they’re talking about
(#schuman2014)
. For me, a sense of cognitive dissonance is created by, on the one side,
the wealth of literature that exists on the topic What is DH? and, on the
other side, the limited understanding of answers to that question given in the
articles discussed above (and that appears to exist outside of the field more
generally).
For the most part DH has not, so far, managed to communicate its values and aims
in a way that can easily be understood by many scholars from other disciplines,
journalists, non-fiction writers and the general public. Neither has DH managed
to adequately communicate (if alone in the sense that this is a much discussed
question within the field) the complex nature of its interrelationship with the
Humanities to this wider audience. In pointing this out my aim is not to
criticise extant What is DH literature? on the grounds that it has not
managed to communicate its message to wider audiences: on the whole, academic
literature does not tend to be written for non-specialist audiences. Rather, my
aim is to point out that the increasing institutionalisation and
professionalization of DH requires us to think about and plan for our discipline
in ways that have not really been necessary up to now. I believe that criticism
such as that contained in the media articles discussed above is potentially very
valuable because it alerts us to the ways that DH is being (mis)understood by
those who do not work in the field and it alerts us to the necessity of
responding in a more systematic way than we have up to now.
On the Public Communication of DH
McCarty’s Busa lecture (#mccarty2014) evoked the virtues of
periodically looking up from the day-to-day research that so thoroughly absorbs
and enthralls us in order to ponder the longer-term research agenda of DH. To
his ruminations on the research trajectory of the field I wish to add a proposal
in the context of what might be seen as the strategy and foresight of the field,
namely the necessity of appointing chairs in the Public Communication of
DH. Perhaps pipeline issues will make the appointment of chairs
difficult in the short term. Yet, at the very least, I believe that our
scholarly associations should support initiatives that could foster the
development of such expertise in the longer term while advocating to those who
control the purse strings about the importance of such appointments. As I will
now outline, I believe that a new field in the Public Communication of DH
could draw on (and further complement) the expertise already present in the
field of the Public Communication of Science. I suggest this not only
because of the field’s demonstrable expertise in the communication of scholarly
research but also because of the various affinities that seem to exist between
it and DH. For example, the current DH situation seems to me rather similar to
one description of the motivations that lay behind activities in the area of the
public communication of science in the 1970s:
[it] involved broader groups
within the scientific communities and reflected, at least in part, a
concern that the good (p.2) news was not being heard – even that the
respect and reputation of science needed to be salvaged
(#bucchi2008)
. I will now present a brief sketch of the origins and current shape of
Science Communication along with some other examples of the affinities that seem
to exist between it and DH.
The public communication of science: a sketch
An awareness of the necessity of communicating to the general public about
science, and advocating for its benefits (and, sometimes, limitations), preceded
the professionalization of science in the mid-19th
century (#bucchi2008). Battifoglia, for example, has
reconstructed the history of
science popularisation through analysis of popular science magazines
published in Italy from 1788 to 2002
(#battifoglia2004).
Various specialised bodies and associations that addressed the furthering of
science were founded in the 19th century . For example, in 1848 the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, an an international non-profit organization dedicated to
advancing science for the benefit of all people
(#aas) was founded. Notwithstanding its relative longevity, today
the issue as to whether Science Communication is a separate and fully fledged
field or a subdiscipline of fields such as the Sociology of Science, Science and
Technology Studies or Media Studies etc., remains contentious. In any case,
structures that are often taken as hallmarks of disciplinarity (dedicated peer
reviewed conferences, journals and scholarly associations) have existed in it
since the 1970s (#gascoigne2010). The following is a
useful overview of the field’s frame of reference: Science communicators think of the media as another
form of discourse...science communication deals with the diffusion,
propagation and appropriation of scientific knowledge in different context,
for different purpose, with different effects (intended or unintended), and
the paradigms employed qualify these processes. Most of the time we deal
with non-formal knowledge of scientific knowledge, which could be (depending
on the theoretical frame of reference we use) representations,
misinterpretations, misconceptions, preconceptions, everyday knowledge, or
common sense knowledge. (#gascoigne2010)

Furthermore, it also tends to have a political and activist dimension: In the years before, during and after
World War II, a generation of scientists with twin commitments to political
activism and science sought to explain contemporary science and its benefits
to the common man.
(#bucchi2008) Aside from affinities with DH in terms of
the latter’s emerging political and activist dimensions,
this
is also relevant in the context of the mainstream portrayal of DH mentioned
above. As I wrote, one might argue that Kirsch (and others) wilfully
misrepresent DH for political ends. Even if this were true, I don’t believe that
it would undermine the necessity of addressing the public communication of DH.
Rather, it draws attention to how narratives about science (in the sense
of wissenschaft) can serve political (and other) agendas, and the
public should be as aware of this in knowledge dissemination contexts as they
are in terms of commercial advertising.
This editorial is not the place to address particulars about the scope or
implementation of the proposed sub-field in the Public Communication of DH;
however, a closer look at some high profile appointments such as the Simonyi
Professorship for the Public Understanding of Science in Oxford University in
the UK emphasise the many promising points of departure that already exist.
Firstly, as I have assumed in the above, such a post could aim to communicate
with not only the general public but also with scholars in other academic
disciplines. That this should ideally be an aspect of the Simonyi Chair is made
clear in the manifesto written at the time it was set up:
[the aim of the post is to] make
important contributions to the public understanding of some scientific
field rather than study the public’s perception of the same. By
public we mean the largest possible audience, provided,
however, that people who have the power and ability to propagate or
oppose the ideas (especially scholars in other sciences and in
humanities, engineers, journalists, politicians, professionals, and
artists) are not lost in the process.
(#simonyi1995)
The manifesto also explains that such a post is necessary due to the
centrality of symbolic expression to the sciences:
Symbolic expression enables the
highest degree of abstraction and thence the utilization of powerful
mathematical and data processing tools ensure tremendous progress. At
the same time the very means of success tends to isolate the scientists
from the lay audience and prevents the communication of the results.
Considering the profoundly vital interdependence between the society at
large and the scientific world, the dearth of effective information flow
is positively dangerous.
(#simonyi1995)
Again, here parallels with DH can be noticed not only due to the role
that computation, and thus symbolic manipulation, plays in our discipline but
also in the way that some Digital Humanities research results have entered or
are entering into the mainstream. The most obvious and widely known example of
this is the impact that TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) had on the language that
would become the lingua franca of data exchange, XML.
It is also notable that in recent times various appointments in what might be
called the Public Communication of the Humanities
have been made. Following on from the successful Being
Human festival, which aimed to
show people the best of what we do
through a festival of the humanities in which researchers can showcase
the latest research, making it accessible to a wider audience and
showing that it is relevant to people’s lives
(#smith2014)
, the University of London’s School of Advanced Study’s appointed its
first chair in public understanding of the humanities, Professor Sarah
Churchwell (Anon 2015). The University of Sheffield has
also appointed Professor Angie Hobbs as Professor of the public understanding of
Philosophy (Anon 2012). While DH has placed itself in
the position for advocating for the Humanities through groups such as
4Humanities, it has not addressed in any meaningful way the necessity of
communicating what it does to a larger and non-specialist public. Therefore, I
have used part of this editorial to make what I hope to have shown is both a
convincing and urgent case for such a development. In the next part of this
editorial I will explain the rationale of the special edition that is presented
here and give an overview of the contributions that are contained in it.
Digital Humanities and the Humanities
The establishment of a sub-field in the Public Communication of DH is
clearly a long-term goal. One important issue for it to communicate to
non-expert publics will be the nature of DH’s relationship to the Humanities. As
outlined above, this crucial question is frequently misrepresented in the
mainstream media. I propose that this would be an important area for endeavours
in the Public Communication of DH to address and explore as early as
possible. The articles included in this special edition enrich and expand
ongoing conversations about the nature of this relationship. In doing so they
make available a wealth of case studies, arguments and insights that can, in due
course, be drawn on to further the Public Communication of DH.
Within the professional and non-professional literature of and about DH the
nature of the interrelationship that exists between it and the Humanities is
much discussed: it has variously, and with varying levels of plausibility, been
argued that DH will replace, extend, revolutionize, redeem, save or even destroy
the Humanities. This special issue will seek to examine this relationship from a
different perspective, namely how and whether DH intersects with one of the most
central concerns of many disciplines of the Humanities: problematization. In
short, the issue aims to explore not whether DH is solving Humanities’ problems;
instead it asks how DH is making such problems more difficult, more problematic,
more indicative of the Human condition. Though the articles contained in this
issue have been written with a broader audience in mind, it is to the
professional literature of the field that they seek to make a contribution.
As text is central to the Humanities the focus of this issue is also text;
however, in light of how digitization remediates all analog sources into a
common binary format the notion of text is here broadly conceived to comprise
any source that contains even a single word or graph, whether text-based art,
audio-visual materials such as oral history recordings, software and computer
programs, visualizations, musical scores etc. It is hoped that this special
issue will not only contribute to current understandings of digital text but
also that it will shed new light on the relationship between the Humanities and
DH in terms of their shared and differing ways of thinking and questioning. In
essence, our aim was to explore, or even simply identify, new routes or
neglected routes for Humanities and DH scholars to traverse. This theme occurs,
to varying degrees, in all the articles selected for inclusion in the issue.
Niels Brüegger’s comparison of digitised collections and web archives gives an
overview of the fascinating and emerging area of web archives while aiming to
understand how different types of digital
material affect different phases of scholarly work. Tanya Clement
argues that DH scholars have made a tradition
of problematizing our understanding of textuality within the context of
designing information systems for texts that, in many cases, still look like
books. She extends this frame of reference by proposing a rationale
of audio text and describing a prototype tool for analysing audio collections.
Claire Clivaz draws on the history of the book and philosophers like Derrida to
argue that the demise of covers and bindings is not a phenomenon that is unique
to the digital age; nevertheless, she calls for DH to dare to depart from ancient bindings and create new
boundaries. Arianna Ciula and Cristina Marras focus on a central
activity of DH, namely modelling, and set out an exploratory framework
(pragmatic modelling) for such practices and then draw on the framework to show
how DH modelling practices challenge
epistemological and linguistic restrictions, by, for example, problematising
the adoption of terminology belonging to the domain of computer
sciences. Stuart Dunn and Mareike Katharina Höckendorff combine perspectives from historical research and
literary criticism to problematize the categorization, computation and
representation of events in cultural heritage. Finally, Stan Ruecker
contrasts the successes that the sciences have made in capturing the public imagination with the situation in
the Humanities where cultural and heritage institutions have tended to provide opportunities for passively consuming
cultural production, rather than with the core interest of the Humanities,
which is in enriching objects of study by analyzing them through a variety
of theoretical lenses. In addition to arguing that the Humanities
must learn from the Sciences in this regard he argues that DH has a crucial role
to play as the driving force behind this
education.
Conclusion
This article has addressed two facets of the communication of Digital Humanities
(DH) and how they have framed this special edition of DHQ. Firstly, I argued that the time has now come to address what
we might call the Public Communication of DH so that we can better
communicate to the general public and academics working in other disciplines
what it is that we do. Secondly, I turned to overarching aim of this special
edition and the articles that are included in it. Though written with a general
audience in mind the articles are not written in a Public Communication of
DH mode (because DH has not yet developed expertise in this area);
rather, they seek to make a contribution to the ongoing question of the nature
of the interrelationship that exists between DH and the Humanities.


American Association for the Advancement of the
Sciences. Mission and History. Available at: https://www.aaas.org/about/mission-and-history
Battifoglia, E., 2004.
Popularised science communication modes in Italian
popular science magazines (1788-2002). Journal of Science
Communication 3(1).
Barker, Elton (@eltonteb). Feb 18
2014. This article would be better entitled
misunderstanding the digital humanities
nytimes.com/2015/02/14/opi… via @jessogden @silviOLOrusso.
Tweet.
Bucchi,
Massimiano, and Brian Trench. 2008. Handbook of Public
Communication of Science and Technology. Routledge.
Gascoigne, T., Cheng, D.,
Claessens, M., Metcalfe, J., Schiele, B., and Shi, S., 2010. Is science communication its own field.
JCOM 7(4).
Harris, M.D., 1984. Observations on computers and poetry.
ACH Newletter, 6(4).
Hitchcock, T., 2013. Historyonics: Hearing the Dead - Ten years of the Old Bailey
Online.
Historyonics. Available at: http://historyonics.blogspot.co.uk/2013/04/hearing-dead-ten-years-of-old-bailey.html
[Accessed March 10, 2015].
Kirsch, A., 2014. Technology Is Taking Over English Departments.
The New Republic. Available at: http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117428/limits-digital-humanities-adam-kirsch
[Accessed March 6, 2015].
Leroi, A.M., 2015. Digitizing the Humanities.
The New York Times. Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/14/opinion/digitizing-the-humanities.html
[Accessed March 6, 2015].
Marche, S., 2012. Literature is not Data: Against Digital Humanities.
Los Angeles Review of Books. Available at: http://lareviewofbooks.org/essay/literature-is-not-data-against-digital-humanities/
[Accessed February 9, 2014].
McCarty, W. Getting there from here. Remembering the future of digital
humanities.Roberto Busa Award Lecture
2013. LiteraryLinguistic
Computing (2014)
Nyhan, J., Flinn, A.
Welsh, A., 2015. Oral History and the Hidden
Histories Project: Towards Histories of Computing in the Humanities.
Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 30(1): 71–85.
Available at http://dsh.oxfordjournals.org/content/30/1/71/. First published
online in Literary and Linguistic Computing, July
30, 2013.
O’Connell, M., 2014. Bright Lights, Big Data.
The New Yorker Blogs. Available at: http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2014/03/bright-lights-big-data.html
[Accessed March 29, 2014].
Rockwell,
G., Nyhan, J., Welsh, A., and Salmon J. 2012. Trading Stories: an Oral History
Conversation between Geoffrey Rockwell and Julianne Nyhan, Digital Humanities Quarterly 6(3). Available at: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/3/000135/000135.html
[Accessed March 10, 2015].
2012 Rockwell, G.,
Organisciak, P., Meredith-Lombay, M., Ranaweera, K., Ruecker, S., Nyhan, J, The
design of an international social media event: a day in the life of the digital
humanities. Digital Humanities Quarterly 6:2
Schnapp, J. et al., 2014. The Immense Promise of the Digital Humanities.
The New Republic. Available at: http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117711/digital-humanities-have-immense-promise-response-adam-kirsh
[Accessed March 8, 2015].
Schuman, R., 2014. Will Digital Humanities #Disrupt the University?
Slate. Available at: http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2014/04/digital_humanities_and_the_future_of_technology_in_higher_ed.html
[Accessed March 9, 2015].
Simonyi, C., 1995. Manifesto. Available at: http://marcusdusautoy.com/about-marcus/the-oxford-simonyi-professor-for-the-public-understanding-of-science/
Smith, B., 2014. Why it’s time for a festival of the humanities. Available at: http://beinghumanfestival.org/time-festival-humanities/.
Straumsheim, C., 2014.
Digital humanities bubble.
Inside Higher Ed. Available at: https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/05/08/digital-humanities-wont-save-humanities-digital-humanists-say#sthash.8ixV4wNi.dpbs
[Accessed March 8, 2015].
Terras, M.M.,
Nyhan, J.Vanhoutte, E. eds., 2013. Defining digital
humanities: a reader, Farnham, Surrey, England : Burlington, VT:
Ashgate Publishing Limited ; Ashgate Publishing Company.

