An Information Science Question in DH Feminism
Tanya Clement
2 September 2015

Introduction
In 1986, Susan Harding published The Science Question in
Feminism in which she suggests that feminism had moved past questioning
What is to be done about the situation of
women in science? — or first-wave feminist initiatives — to
include more women in the work of science. Inquiry had moved on in second-wave
feminism to wonder about the science
question in feminism or
Is it possible to use for
emancipatory ends sciences that are apparently so intimately involved in
Western, bourgeois, and masculine projects?
(#harding1986)
. Certainly, there is still more discussion needed about including more women
in technology fields, but aspects of the science
question that consider the politics underlying epistemologies of
purportedly value-neutral claims and
practices
(#harding1986)
resonate for the work (the research, theory, and practices) being done to
build information infrastructure in the humanities today — the work that I am
defining here as digital humanities work.
This work in the digital humanities includes the development of scholarly information
infrastructure and reflects a tie between information studies and the humanities.
These ties include, among other things, the technology, services, practices, and policy that support
publication practices, data, research
methods, collaboration, incentives, and learning
(#borgman2009)
. Christine Borgman and others (#drucker2009) agree that
creating technological infrastructure in the humanities must be collaborative, based
on common understandings that pertain to the work both information studies and
digital humanities are doing to build and theorize this infrastructure.
Reconsidering this work by using the lens of feminist inquiry to understand the
concerns common to information science and digital humanities is the perspective I
describe here. Specifically, as my title suggests, I am proposing that feminist
inquiry can help us articulate and better understand the epistemologies in digital
humanities and information science that are shaping the infrastructures we are
building and using in the humanities.
In terms of practice, the ties between digital humanities and information science
seem obvious. Digital humanities comprises ways of practice that are afforded by
algorithms and accessed through interfaces and visualizations; practices that are
articulated and organized by metadata and databases and social networks that are
designed within institutions and fields of study that have been informed by the
sciences, the social sciences, by human computer interaction (HCI), and computer
science; practices that are very often transacted within the context of digital
resources from archives and libraries. Finally, these are practices accomplished by
workers visible and invisible from scores of fields of inquiry in the humanities and
fields associated with information science. Willard McCarty proposes
twenty-two fields in the Methodological Commons of
DH (#mccarty2005)

Ultimately, feminist critique concerns a responsibility to ask questions about these
practices, to better understand the epistemologies embedded within these histories
of knowledge production, to reframe the practices of digital humanities as
information work and vice versa – a reframing that ultimately broadens and deepens
the conversation. Feminist inquiry is particularly useful because its modes of
inquiry are steeped in the sciences, the social sciences, and the humanities. Donna
Haraway has written that the science community considers knowledge production as
histories of the technologies
(#haraway1988)
. Yet, from a feminist perspective, we are ultimately responsible not only to
be self-conscious or self-aware of technologies as ways of life, social orders, practices of visualization but
to become answerable to
what we learn how to see
(#haraway1988)
. As such, in this discussion, I consider how thinking about the tie between
digital humanities (DH) and information science through feminist inquiry can help us
become answerable to the manner in which DH work — its ways of practice — are shaped
by (and shape) ways of life and social orders.
The technologies that I discuss here, however, are not always digital.
Martha Nell Smith has very usefully defined humanist technologies as
the means by which we accomplish
various ends — the tools and devices on which our critical suppositions
rely
(#smith2005)
. Smith has argued that the relationship between humanities disciplines and
feminist scholarship in DH is reflected in four areas in which she sees fundamental
ties revealed: technologies of access, multimedia study
objects, collaboration, and self-consciousness.
In this same vein, in the three sections of this discussion, I reposition what I am
calling the DH technologies of interdisciplinarity,
mastery, and self-consciousness with feminist notions
of situatedness, plausibility, and
responsibility. These three sections demonstrate how feminist modes
of inquiry that allow us to see commonalities between information science and
digital humanities may help us articulate a concern with situated, not transcendent
knowledges; with embodied objectivity and plausibility rather than truth; and with a
responsibility to not only learn how systems work, technically, socially, and
psychically but to act on that knowledge and build information infrastructures that
reflect humanistic concerns.

I. The Technology of Interdisciplinarity and Situated Perspectives

The Technology of Interdisciplinarity
Interdisciplinarity connotes a productive, multi-perspectival
position that seems to fit comfortably in the humanities. Cathy N. Davidson
and David Theo Goldberg maintain that it is essential that the humanities
remain at the forefront of academic inquiry because
the interdisciplinary modes
of the humanities . . . concern basic constitutive features of the
social sciences, sciences, technology and the professions
(#davidson2004)
. Similarly, Bruno Latour posits that the humanist’s job should be to
assemble these interdisciplinary modes instead of debunking them and to
offer
the participants arenas in
which to gather
(#latour2004)
. Indeed, interdisciplinarity (and its accompanying
metaphors of collaborative assembly and gathering) have been touted as
potential keys to resolving crisis in the humanities, which constellate
among a variety of practical concerns such as decreased enrollment in
humanist studies, decreased jobs for recent PhDs, limited opportunities for
publishing and therefore a weakened tenure process; and philosophical issues
that concern the role of the humanities in the university. Most importantly
for this discussion, there is also a pervasive notion that
interdisciplinarity is a basic and natural
tenet of accomplished digital work (#abel2004); ; (#smith2005);
(#perloff2004)
Certainly, interdisciplinary work is anything but easy, regardless of its
digital aspects. It belies a political and networked infrastructure that
allows for and precludes certain kinds of interactions to happen. I have
written about the very real and situated institutional parameters that must
be in place in order to support what Smith calls the technology of collaboration in DH
(#clement2012), as well as the fact that institutional bodies
can facilitate or preclude interdisciplinary practices for certain fields
over others, including collaborations between engineering and computer
science over collaborations with those same fields and the humanities . Further, Patrik Svensson highlights real
concerns for the humanities about infrastructure that is developed within
existing infrastructural models (such as the library, museum, or archival
system) and scientific models that are based on heavy data use since these
models could reflect an uncritical bias towards the epistemic commitments of
those communities and a disregard for the more unmarked humanistic
technologies and infrastructures discussed in part by Smith above .
Most significantly, the perspective that interdisciplinarity is somehow
native to digital practices and scholarship masks both the
great amount of work and resources needed to enact interdisciplinarity and
the predominance of interdisciplinarity in fields with more traditional
humanistic methods. Such notions of inherent interdisciplinarity can be
critically unproductive because the interdisciplinary mark can often occlude
an unsituated standpoint. For example, Willard McCarty imagines the digital
humanist as a metadisciplinary practitioner within a Methodological Commons of humanities
computing that comprises twenty-two disciplinary kinships that cover the
wide range of disciplines from which computing application and research
draw, such as cognitive science, law, performance studies, linguistics,
musicology, and so on (#mccarty2005). He positions
the DH practitioner, as both technologically savvy and consequently worldly
in her multiple, disciplinary knowledges that are situated outside the
commons: she is not the
scholar who engages in discussions that are strongly delimited by the scholar’s particular
specialism
(#mccarty2005); rather, she is a migratory or itinerant project
participant with the performative ability to move in and out of disciplines
(#mccarty2005). In contrast to the scholar, the DH
practitioner can step outside
that space, so as to connect the problem in question with a method,
vocabulary or way of thinking uncommon to that scholar’s
discipline
(#mccarty2005). As a result, the DH practitioner has
the perspective of an
outsider’s objectivity
(#mccarty2005), and she is consequently best
positioned to effect the kind of sea change within fields of knowledge
production in general that crisis resolution demands . In McCarty’s paradigm, it is the
situated scholar who has limited vision while the interdisciplinary DH
practitioner is all-seeing.
Situated Perspectives
A note about the metaphor of seeing is useful here. I use word
perspectives consciously and critically to frame this
section on situated perspectives in the same sense that Haraway
uses vision as a critical metaphor for describing situatedness. Noting the
privileged knowledges that a vision metaphor has traditionally occupied in
concepts of objectivity and empiricism, Haraway
calls the all-seeing viewpoint a singular, uncritical perspective; she calls
it
this eye that fucks the world
to make techno-monsters
(#haraway1988)
. Instead, Haraway proposes a feminist doctrine of objectivity that is
situated as specific
embodiment rather than a
false vision promising
transcendence of all limits and responsibility
(#haraway1988)
. It is this notion of vision that necessarily implies an embodied
perspective that helps us reposition the technology of
interdisciplinarity in DH as a perspective from
somewhere rather than a
conquering gaze from
nowhere
(#haraway1988)
.
Understanding interdisciplinarity as necessarily situated means
learning to position the work of DH within the commons,
within the fields that shape its practices. Feminist
epistemologies including standpoint theory and postmodern situated
perspectives emerged during the 1970s and 1980s as critical theories about
relations between the production of knowledge and practices of power in
science. Considering matters of
[o]bjectivity vs.
subjectivity, the scientist as knowing subject vs. the objects of
his inquiry, reason vs. emotions, mind vs. body,
(#harding1986)
, both standpoint theory and postmodern theory hold that all knowledge
is historically and geographically created by embodied participants. As
such, they offer this insistent embodiment as
a rich tradition of
critiquing hegemony without disempowering positivisms and
relativisms and a way to get nuanced theories of mediation
(#haraway1988)
. Ultimately, standpoint theory suggests that understanding the
influence of multiple, embodied perspectives rather than attempting a metadisciplinary roving eye is
necessary to enhancing knowledge.
The situated epistemologies that shape the information infrastructures we are
building in DH is of particular concern to this discussion; consequently, I
consider throughout how situating a discussion about the work of DH within
information science can help us better articulate the epistemological
underpinnings in DH that we have come to take for granted. To demonstrate a
basic area of intersection, I discuss in the next section how the notion of
the document in information science can help us think through
how epistemologies in literary studies concerning the text are
and can be engaged through the development of information systems.
Text as Document
Geoffrey Harpham argues that the
humanities have the text as their object, humanity as their subject, and
self-understanding as their purpose; for Harpham, a
text may mean
any material artifact — a
cityscape, a carved bone, an earthwork
(#harpham2005)
. Within McCarty’s Methodological Commons, the text of study
also includes digital images, sound, and video files as well as numbers,
analytical tools, and data structures. For literary scholars, in particular,
a literary (or poetic While Marjorie Perloff
distinguishes between what she considers the imprecise 18th century term
literature and the term poetics — which
she claims has a
much more ancient and
cross-cultural lineage
(#perloff2004)
—McCarty also uses the term poetic to refer to the
ergodic nature of literary language .) text is indicated by its material (such as its paper or
binding) as well as its linguistic and bibliographic codes. Terms that
McGann employs in A Critique of Modern Textual
Criticism
(#mcgann1983) Further, from Roland Barthes’
theories concerning text vs. work
(#barthes1977) to the social text theories of David Greetham
(#greetham1994) and Jerry McGannto John Bryant’s notion of fluid text theory in the digital environment
(#bryant2002) can be an object or a
phenomenon we perceive before us in a specific time and space or a process
or a flow of energy
within a social and cultural context that spans multiple times and spaces
(#bryant2002). There is little room in the scope of this
piece to rehearse the history of textual studies, but it is important to
note that theories concerning textual objects of study have had
wide-reaching impact on how DH scholars have developed digital information
infrastructures such as computational algorithms, databases, interfaces,
scholarly editions, and visualizations.
As textual studies is, in part, concerned with the publishing and social
systems (the scholarly infrastructure) that help us define
text, document theory in information science considers the
document within particular contexts or systems of
organization and distribution concerning documentation. A brief history of
document theory within information science shows some of
the same theoretical roots in textual and bibliographic studies that Matthew
Kirschenbaum has identified as a significant aspect of DH’s beginnings . For example, the acceleration of
publication in the late 19th century came with an increase in creating,
disseminating, and utilizing recorded knowledge and an enhanced desire for
new techniques such as documentation for managing the information deluge.
Michael Buckland notes that the early term to denote the set of management
techniques including collecting, standardizing, filing, classifying,
copying, disseminating, and preserving documents was traditionally bibliography but became
documentation in
the early 20th century (#buckland1997). As a result,
documentation replaced bibliography as the
term of practice to refer to scholarly information services, records management, and archival
work, and eventually, evolved into the more current terms information science,
information storage and
retrieval, and information management
(#buckland1997).
Paul Otlet — whom Wikipedia calls the father of information science and
Michael Buckland names the most
central figure in the development of Documentation
Michael Buckland’s Paul Otlet Page
people.ischool.berkeley.edu/~bucklandotlet.html, Accessed
December 14, 2012. — was of the first to argue for an expanded
definition or identity for the document, one that expanded the notion of a
document to include its situated context. For Otlet, who published his
seminal text Traité de documentation in
Brussels in 1934, documentation work comprised the act of observing and then
recording facts in publications in order to make these facts an
integral part of
knowledge
(#otlet1990)
. In Otlet’s definition of the document, however, he was also
concerned with social
facts which were groupings of documents,
the appraisal of which is
valuable only in proportion to the number of elements which it takes
into account
(#otlet1990)
. In order to take these groupings into account, Otlet imagined
a system of cards that would
allow one to make networks and to add to them: the creation of a
kind of artificial brain by means of cards containing actual
information or simply notes of references
(#otlet1990)
. Imagining a singularly subjective process for managing the cards
that rivaled processes as intricate and forward-looking as Vannevar Bush’s
Memex machine, Otlet realized that
judgments here [were] as
complex as the matters judged
(#otlet1990)
. A document could either be the publication or the multiple
instantiations that make up the networked social fact or the relationship between
documents. Much like the Barthesian text, which is defined as
a methodological
field in contrast to the work (described as concrete, occupying a portion of
book-space) (#barthes1977), Otlet’s
social facts are
the field in which evidentiary facts (i.e., each unique
publication) participate. Like genetic textual scholars, Otlet sought to
document this social system in which documents circulated by using separate
cards for both publications and the events and relationships that tied them,
thus allowing for all the
manipulations of classification and continuous interfiling
(#otlet1990)
.
Later, in Qu'est-ce que la documentation?,
Suzanne Briet (#briet1951) defines the document as perceived
and situated by those who participate in the system of its documentation.
First, like Otlet, she seeks to expand the definition of
document from fact or publication to anything that is
identified as or perceived as evidentiary. Arguing that the document is
always the result of the methods of documentation, Briet asks,
Is a star a document? Is a
pebble rolled by a torrent a document? Is a living animal a
document? No. But the photographs and the catalogues of stars, the
stones in a museum of mineralogy, and the animals cataloged and
shown in a zoo, are documents
(#briet1951)
. Because the work of documentation is
a powerful means for the
collectivization of knowledge and ideas
(#briet1951)
, Briet argues that the document is intimately tied to the life of a team of workers
or scientists or scholars, and because it can participate in a
multitude of industrial,
commercial, administrative, teaching activity, etc. contexts,
the content of documentation is necessarily
inter-documentary
(#briet1951)
.
Briet’s way of defining the document is akin to the theoretical groundwork
laid by D.F. McKenzie The Sociology of Texts
[1999] and Jerome McGann’s A Critique of Modern Textual
Criticism [1983] for understanding the social nature of textual
production. Both McKenzie and McGann argue for considering all aspects of a
text’s construction when determining its textuality —
from its production, through its transmission, to its consumption by
readers. In his Panizzi Lectures of 1985, McKenzie is concerned with
the roles of institutions
and their complex structures in affecting the forms of social
discourse, past and present
(#mckenzie1999)
and he thinks critically about these roles by identifying human roles
in textuality including producer (author/editor) and transmitter
(editor/printer/publisher) and consumer (reader/user). Like Briet’s
document, the text theorized by McKenzie and
McGann is always constructed by a situated context that includes the
invisible hands of editors, publishers, and book sellers among others.
A familiarity with how text and document theories intersect is essential in
understanding current thinking about the manner in which texts and documents
are represented by information systems. More recently, Bernd Frohman
discusses the document in relation to Jacques Derrida’s differance
(#derrida1982) in a way that is particularly instructive for
thinking about the work of DH infrastructure building. Arguing that
documents are
different material kinds of
temporally and spatially situated bundles of inscriptions embedded
in specific kinds of cultural practices
(#frohmann2004b)
, Frohman asserts that the differences between social and
natural-scientific facts are epistemological rather than ontological: Differences lie in problems of
revealing facts, he writes . That is, Frohman argues that these facts are not essentially different
since each is vulnerable to the fact that writing practices that are meant
to reveal them or make them evidentiary actually help to obscure an item of information’s
own identity
(#frohmann2004). In other words, what a situated
individual would document on one of Otlet’s cards is not representative of
the essential or discrete nature of the fact that these documents
represented that documenter’s perspective. Accordingly, Frohman asks us to
consider the human fault lines of Otlet’s system: What befalls the privileged order of facts when
their signs are mechanically manipulated at will? Anyone’s will?
(#frohmann2004)
Frohman notes that a Derridean notion of iterability necessarily poses a
problem for a system like Otlet’s order of facts since every
inter-documented and auxiliaried fact could bear the trace of
an infinite number of situated networks. Frohman’s perspective is much like
John Bryant’s who sees the textual event differently than social textual
theorists and the geneticists by arguing that these camps measure process
based on product where the work is always a
conceptual thing or actual set
of things or even discrete events
(#bryant2002)
. Just as Frohman describes the state or process of documentation as
reflecting an intensity or a force, an energy
that feeds this obsessive documentation and the drive to reveal facts
(#frohmann2004), Bryant suggests that the work is a
flow of energy, and
that literary work is a phenomenon . . . best conceived not as a produced work (oeuvre) but as
work itself (travaille), the power of people and culture to create a
text
(#bryant2002). Further, Michael Witmore argues that
a text is a text because it
is massively addressable at different levels of scale
(#witmore2012)a hundred years from now, the
available computational objects may be related to one another in new
ways
(#witmore2012). Texts will be defined by their
massively addressable nature or the extent to which the
reader can query (or address) the object at the level of the word, the
phrase, the book, or at the level of a genre of works or networks such as
those Otlet imagined a century ago. As such, the text’s nature becomes its
addressability, which would be defined by the system in which it is stored
and through which it is retrieved (#witmore2012).
Texts will be defined by their massively addressable nature or
the extent to which the reader can query (or address) the object at the
level of the word, the phrase, the book, or at the level of a genre of works
or networks such as those Otlet imagined a century ago. As such, the text’s
nature becomes its addressability, which would be defined by the system in
which it is stored and through which it is retrieved . Specifically, knowledge production is
manifested in the objects we create (sometimes with clay or words or paint,
sometimes through identification or revelation) and choose to study, but
this knowledge is put into action, is made interpretable by an interaction
with information infrastructures or systems (such as the publication cycle,
the creation and use of Otlet’s cards, or the development of a database or
interface). Like Briet, Frohman, and Witmore, John Bryant questions,
how shall the makers of the
archive facilitate and delimit our ability to construct texts,
editions, and knowledge?
(#bryant2011)
.
In other words, can we theorize an information system that can accommodate
literary theories of text as well as information-based theories
of the document? Certainly, there is a tension present in
infrastructure that is built to serve conceptual texts or
documents within a digital context that is equally
concerned with delivering information. In communication theory
from the beginning, information has been associated with
uncertainty (a byproduct of the amount of noise in a signal) and the
resolution of uncertainty instead of with a more connotative sense of
knowledge. Indeed, the revolutionary aspect of Claude E. Shannon’s 1948
piece A Mathematical Theory of Communication,
which is often considered the beginnings of information theory, was that he
statistically positioned noise against signal to
resolve
[t]he fundamental problem of
communication . . . reproducing at one point either exactly or
approximately a message selected at another point
(#shannon1971)
. Shannon defined information as a function of the degree
of uncertainty or the degree of entropy that is produced when one message is chosen from the
set on the receiving end and that message is compared against
the intended message from the information source . To explain very briefly, in Shannon’s test scenario, the
information source (e.g., the writer or the speaker) produces a message,
which a transmitter encodes into a signal for transmission over the channel;
the receiver then decodes the signals, thereby reconstructing the message for the
destination or
the person (or thing) for
whom the message was intended
(#shannon1971)
. Noise in this schematic represents disturbances in the
signal that create uncertainty as to whether or not the message that was
received was the message sent. Consequently, there is more
information when
the received signal is
selected out of a more varied set than is the transmitted
signal
(#weaver1949)
.
That information and information systems are situated social and
cultural constructs, shaped by time and space is well-theorized in
information and technology studies. Wilbur Schramm labeled the
Shannon-Weaver communication model as the bullet theory in which communication was
seen as a magic bullet that transferred knowledge from one mind to another
(#schramm1971). Instead, Schramm defined
information as
any content that reduces
uncertainty or the number of alternative possibilities in a
situation
(#schramm1971)
. The
message exists as a sign or a
collection of signs with no meaning of their own except that which
cultural learning enables a receiver to read into them
(#schramm1971)
. Michael Buckland maintains that information systems must operate on
discrete entities (what is
handled and operated upon, what is stored and retrieved) or
information-as thing
(#buckland1991), but he is clear that this idea of
information means situating textual and documentary theory in seemingly
oppositional practical constraints: information systems handle information only in
a sense of information dismissed by leading theorists of
information, Buckland writes . The same tension exists for humanists: When
text is bits and bytes, how do we represent and consider
and keep in transparent play the force and power of differánce that is of interest to DH scholars who work with
text while also keeping in mind that the computer requires
some level of classification, some
privileged order of
facts
(#frohmann2004)
?
This consideration for how we perceive the nature of text and
document and how we interact with or move them through
situated knowledge production systems creates an opportunity for critical
inquiry into the situated contexts or the epistemic commitments that lie
behind our practices in DH. This section attempts to demonstrate that
interdisciplinarity is less productive as a technology that
unsituates us or removes us from a standpoint.
Interdisciplinarity is most useful when it becomes a technology that affords
our ability to better situate ourselves: to see how we see, from where we
see, who is interpreting the field (and who is not), the limits to our
vision, and what we see when what we see is situated in relation to other
visions. Frederic Jameson reminds us that
all truths are at best
momentary, situational, and marked by a history in the process of
change and transformation
(#jameson2009)
. A feminist perspective encourages us to responsibly embrace that
portion of reality that concerns us (to situate ourselves) even as we change
and transform with the realization that (a) we cannot step outside of our
perspective, and (b) in the attempt to do so, we step outside the mode of
intellectual rigor needed to influence our position as subject and agent.
Thus, situatedness within a discipline reveals important
factors that inspire critical differentiation and, necessarily, action. This
very brief history about the mutual concerns within fields that are
theorizing textuality and documentation reveals
ties between literary textual studies and information studies that I will
consider in the next two sections with more specific examples.

III. The Technology of Mastery and Plausibility

The Technology of Mastery
A feminist perspective based on situated knowledges teaches us
that perspectives that seek to liberate us from the obstacles that
difficulties impose often result in blinding us from the opportunities that
difficulties illuminate. In digital humanities, the technology of
mastering technology has been considered a productive means of
combatting what is considered the general
degree of ignorance about
information technology and its critical relevance to humanities
education and scholarship
(#mcgann2005)
. Even if one does not code, the argument goes, one should be
well-versed in digital method, in project management, in data visualization
and so forth. I’ve spent almost
twenty years, Jerome McGann writes, studying this subject in the only way that gives
one a chance of mastering it. That is, by hands-on collaborative
interdisciplinary work; likening the mastery of technology to
language acquisition, McGann continues,
You learn it by speaking it
and writing it. There’s no other way. Anything less is just, well,
theoretical
(#mcgann2005)
. At the same time, there has been much debate in DH about whether
designing and building tools gives one an indispensable knowledge of its
processes and whether or not women and people of color (and others) are
precluded from these activities for a variety of very real and very situated
reasons. In this sense, the rhetoric of mastery over technology can be
intellectually prohibitive since it threatens an advancement of knowledge
production from other perspectives. Indeed, in McCarty’s paradigm, the
unsituated DH practitioner is
liberate[d] from the censure
of difficulty and so allow[ed]. . . to go in heretofore forbidding
directions
(#mccarty2005)
; in McCarty’s paradigm, the DH practitioner and the scholar take
the standpoint of the
master, the Man, the One God, whose Eye produces, appropriates and
orders all difference
(#haraway1988). We are blinded so we may see.
In contrast, literary texts have a history of inspiring us to let go of the
desire for single-eyed mastery. All literature is to some extent aware of itself as a
technology, Richard Poirier writes.
But literary modernism
thrusts this awareness upon us and to an unprecedented degree asks
us to experience the enormous difficulties of mastering a
technology
(#poirier1992)
. Megan Simpson argues that Gertrude Stein’s writing challenges not only normative reading
habits but the literary values such habits depend
on: clarity, unproblematized reference, linearity, decodable
meaning, that those
who find Stein’s work to be quite readable not in spite of, but because
of the absence of these qualities seem to feel liberated from the
imperative toward mastery implicit in the traditional model of literary
interpretation
(#simpson2000). Stein replaces these with what
DeKoven describes as anti-patriarchal modes that are
incoherent, open-ended,
anarchic, irreducibly multiple, and focused on what Barthes calls
the magic of the
signifier
(#dekoven1983)
. The Baroness Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven is another example of a
female poet whose work seemed to embody a defiance for mastery. Her
biographer Irene Gammel places much emphasis on Freytag-Loringhoven’s
ability to put herself in
control by putting
her spectators at a distance, which is accomplished by the
manner in which she deflates
the potential eroticism of her nude performances
through humorous costuming:
vegetables adorn her body; stamps decorate her painted face; her
hair is shaved and head lacquered in a striking color
(#gammel1999)
. As well, the bawdy humor and the vulgarities in her poetry and work
had an equally disarming effect. William Carlos Williams once wrote:
Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven came to
me as sunlight. I drank pure helicon of her. But she revolted me,
frightened me, beat me finally
(#UWM)
. Literary theory has emphasized the perspective that literary texts
produce knowledge to the extent that they resist simple evaluative
resolutions. Two very interesting studies about the history of
difficulty in literary study are Diepeveen 2003 and Poirier
1992. Certainly, the DH practitioner working with experimental
literary texts For more on the political nature of experimental
literature by women see DeKoven 2006 1694. may not steer clear of political and
professional questions as Willard McCarty proposeswithout rendering mute essential aspects of
experimentation and difficulty.
Plausibility
The feminist notion of plausibility helps us understand how an
interpretive environment can foster values that concern responsibility
rather than mastery. Mary Hawkesworth describes this notion of plausibility
in science as the result of disbanding the myth of the
given:
Once the
myth of the
given
(#sellars1963)
has been abandoned and once the belief that the absence of
one invariant empirical test for the truth of a theory implies the
absence of all criteria for evaluative judgment has been repudiated,
then it is possible to recognize the rational grounds for assessing
the merits of alternative theoretical interpretations . . . the
stimuli that trigger interpretation limit the class of
plausible characterizations without dictating one
absolute description.
(#hawkesworth2006)
Accordingly, like literary histories and texts that seem to defy singular
readings and to demand alternative and alternating theoretical
interpretations, DH information infrastructure should be valued by the
extent to which it offers a means by which plausible
interpretive standpoints, framed by critical (that is responsible and
intellectual) judgments, can be expressed. This feminist sense of
objectivity, which does not offer authoritative techniques or guarantee the
production of truth, is useful when developing systems that are both
computational (of bits and bytes) and used to facilitate complex, humanist
critical inquiries.
Here again, an epistemic tie with information science is revealed in the
extent to which many information science and technology studies scholars
have grappled with the nature of plausibility in situated information
systems.(#bowker1999); ; (#berg1998); ; (#ensmenger2010); ; (#feinberg2009a); ; (#feinberg2010); ; and (#wajcman2007) to name
a few. In particular, Melanie Feinberg has identified rhetorical
mechanisms in information systems that help us think critically about how
information systems reflect logical argument (#feinberg2010),
ethos (#feinberg2009b), and genre adaptation . What is particularly powerful about
Feinberg’s overarching question within the context of DH scholarly
information infrastructure is her suggestion that a system’s persuasiveness or value
is not based on the extent to which it creates truth but rather on the extent to
which the system entices the audience to explore the ways the system
contribute[s] to the
reader’s own evolving interpretation of the domain of the
scheme
(#feinberg2010)
— or the reader’s own sense of the plausibility of an interpretation
given the nature of the interpretive environment. Like Haraway’s suggestion
that we examine the episteme of technologies through ways and practices,
Bernd Frohman proposes
descriptions of documentary
practices
(#frohmann2004b)
that can help us identify the field of the plausible. In particular,
he notes four properties for characterizing documentary practices that help
us articulate how the development of a system shapes plausibility: that is,
documentary practices are fundamentally (1) material; (2) institutionalized;
(3) dependent on socializations such as training, teaching, correction, and other
disciplinary measures; and (4) historicized or of a particular
time and place (#frohmann2004b). To demonstrate, in
this section, I discuss how these four properties impact the field of
plausible interpretations in an electronic edition of poetry by Elsa von
Freytag-Loringhoven (1874-1927) that I developed and co-edited with Gaby
Divay called The Firstling/Erstling/He Complex
(#loringhoven2012)
This edition is available online at http://www.scholarlyediting.org/2012/editions/baroness/main.baroness.html..
The Firstling/Erstling/He Complex represents an
open-source collaboration that seeks to represent a poem by
Freytag-Loringhoven. This complex poem is a cluster of
works (one text in the Barthesian sense) that includes thirty-three versions
of a poem in two languages by Freytag Loringhoven. The entire cluster can be
dated between 1923 and 1924 when the poet had just returned to Berlin after
twelve years in the United States. About one third of the poems are in
German and tend to be composed in a more traditional form and style. Two
thirds are in English. As this versioned edition shows, Freytag Loringhoven
did not simply translate this poem. She rewrote her poem over time using the
two languages to embody adaptations or re-creations that reflected her
changing geography, economic status, love experiences, and poetic
philosophies. Please see http://www.scholarlyediting.org/2012/editions/baroness/main.baroness.html.
Indeed, in Freytag-Loringhoven studies, there are a variety of materials to
consider and languages and disciplines from which to approach her work. She
was a published poet, a street performer, and an artist. She published in
German and in English and she lived in Germany, the United States, and
France.
Material
Freytag-Loringhoven’s work corresponds to Raymond Williams’s assertion that
language in modernist writing is
more evident as a medium
— a medium that could be shaped and reshaped — than as a social
custom
(#loringhoven2012)
. For example, in a selection of letters written to Djuna Barnes after
her return to Germany in 1923, Freytag-Loringhoven re-examines her
relationship to both American and German cultures through the manifestation
of English and German in her writing:
I know why I beg! I ask
for my soul’s honour, mental activity. I only move in English
sounds. I am homesick for English language, my ear declines, my
taste nauseated by German sound — and yet I lose my facility in
English, words come not easy, sometimes meaning is doubtful, new
expressions do not present themselves. As much as I read
English, it is not alive — living, because I am not, hence no
fluctuation, instigation — creation . . . must again dream in
English . . . I am left drifting old wreck — no I cannot — I
cannot — I cannot, I am too proud!
I cannot stand the Germans, I cannot stand their language. I am
traitor here!
(#loringhoven1928)
Here, Freytag-Loringhoven’s body is language. When her English is
dead, she is physically stilted. When she speaks German, she is physically
sick. She laments her loss of English as if she were a painter who had lost
use of her fingers or a dancer unable to walk. In concert with Williams’s
assertion that modernists who were (or interacted with) immigrants perceived
language not
in the old sense, customary
and naturalized but in many ways arbitrary and conventional
(#williams1996)
, Freytag-Loringhoven experienced language as a synaesthete might —
she move[d] in English sound, her
taste nauseated by German
sound. Language for Freytag-Loringhoven was a significant
element of what she considered her naturalized identity. As a result,
language functions as an essential aspect of provocation within her Dadaist
project — she used linguistic codes as experimental tools for play.
Understanding her lived presence and the posthumous literary productions
surrounding that presence has become an important aspect of understanding
her poetry, her performances, and her impact on literary studies. Given the
material of this poem, however, an information infrastructure that
facilitates access to the element of language play that Williams identifies
provides for a variety of plausible perspectives.
Institutionalization
Julia Flanders considers subjectivity (our own readerly motivations) as one
aspect of humanist inquiry that standardized encoding practices tend to
disregard due to precedents set by institutional-level (libraries and
commercial industry) projects, which sought to represent texts from an
unbiased standpoint (#flanders2005). The digital
files in the The Firstling/Erstling/He Complex
edition comprise one file that has been encoded according to the XML
(Extensible Markup Language) standard outlined in the Text Encoding
Initiative’s (TEI) P5 Guidelines. The TEI Guidelines, while restrictive in
some senses, are reflexive in their awareness that such encoding makes
explicit an interpretation
of a text. Please see http://www.tei-c.org/P4X/SG.html. XML (Extended
Mark-up Language), like HTML, is a subset of SGML (Standard Generalized
Mark-up Language). XML includes mark-up that describes more conceptual
notions text, not just how it appears on the browser page — the primary
function of HTML. For example, in the following excerpt, a line group
lg and the lines l within it
are marked-up or tagged with the
poet’s additions add and deletions
del:
headFirstling/head
lg
lLove — /l
ldelCame/del
addSHONE /add
/l
ldelTore/del
addCLIPPED/add/l
lPast/l

/lg
This work facilitates incorporating Freytag-Loringhoven’s
texts into an environment that has the theoretical potential to provide
access to her language play and her social networks as well, which was our
primary goal in providing access to her poetic work. To this end, I encoded
the XML file using the parallel segmentation and location-referenced
encoding described in the P5 Guidelines in order to make explicit our
interpretations of the complex web of relationships across the changes
represented in the thirty-three versions of the text (which manifest across
twenty-two, full color, documentary images of the manuscript pages).
All of the versions represented here are based on images created at the
University of Maryland (UM), College Park, Libraries, where the original
manuscripts reside in the Papers of Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven (http://hdl.handle.net/1903.1/1501) in the Library's Literary
Manuscripts Collection. We encoded the transcriptions with
meta-text or annotation or
other marks within a text, and we used Versioning Machine
Please see http://vmachine.org. scripts to transform the XML file
into an HTML file that becomes a web interface. Using this interface,
readers can see the relationships we have marked across this poetic event
while also allowing them to manipulate comparisons (see To be sufficiently
and coherently critical in DH, technologies should be developed and used
within a culture that is not only critically self-aware about the uses to
which technologies are employed but also how that employment has been
situated by the epistemic commitments of the people behind these
technologies and to what effect. For example, notwithstanding its virtues,
encoding with a standard such as the TEI can be extremely frustrating for
editors attempting to realize abstract texts. As McGann points out, the TEI
has adopted a markup practice
— a linguistic and paper-based approach — that is at odds with the
theoretical opportunities that have been opened up by electronic
textuality, where the limits of the codex are surpassed; this
frustration, he and others complain, results from the TEI incorporating
hierarchies that
misimagine the relation of
electronic to paper-based textuality
(#mcgann1996)
. For better or worse, these hierarchies represent the artifacts of
working with computational models. On the other hand, other opportunities
for new knowledge are possible with TEI encoding.
The Firstling/Erstling/He Complex interface using the Versioning
Machine 4.0
Screenshot of the Firstling/Erstling/He Complex
interface


Socialization
Situating our critical perspectives and employing a feminist notion of
objective practices that seeks to facilitate plausible readings positions us
to realize that systems of representation, whether digital or not, are
subjective, abstract models that we build to reflect our situations. This
realization should encourage us to work towards imagining alternative uses
for encodings that motivate readers to think differently and critically,
encodings that are not dismantled by a desire for objectivity and thus
mastery over truth. Flanders, for example, adopts the vision
metaphor to emphasize and make transparent the subjective aspect of
editorial practices within TEI XML encoding. By shifting our view, she writes,
we can understand XML as a
way of expressing perspectival understandings of the text: not as a
way of capturing what is timeless and essential, but as a way of
inscribing our own changeable will on the text” and the “strategic
positioning of our own readerly motivations
(#flanders2005)
.
For example, starting with manuscripts of two traditionally crafted German
poems in twelve versions (Erstling and Erste Lieb), we show that Freytag-Loringhoven also
develops two branches of English poems (Firstling and First Love) in this
edition. The explanation that follows is best experienced by the
reader by working through the edition itself which has been published
online (#loringhoven2012) at http://www.scholarlyediting.org/2012/editions/baroness/main.baroness.html.
Each of the version numbers can be located at this publication.
An example of the predominant Erstling/Firstling variants appear together in versions 3.1 and
3.2, while the other strain of variants evolve from Erste Liebe/First Love into the less well represented He poems, making the The Firstling/Erstling/He
Complex of the title. In particular, the works in this edition show that
Freytag-Loringhoven used translation as a technique to express her
perspectives (and to play with these expressions) on both German and
American cultures and languages. Note 5.3 verso explains
Freytag-Loringhoven’s perspective on at least one evolving theme:
Freytag-Loringhoven tells Djuna Barnes (to whom she has sent this poem in a
letter) that the German Erstling (3.1) was
touching and naiv [sic], and
the English Firstling (3.2) bitter and grim. Further, the puns
Freytag-Loringhoven derives from the name of her supposed once-lover Ernst
Hardt (1876-1947) provide for one example of the sense of cross-language
play in the poems. Titles such as Firstling
(version 1.1), First Love (version 8.3), First Born (version 9.5), Erstling (version 3.1), He
(version 4.2), and Liebe (version 10), indicate
that the poems are referring to this first love (three versions of which are
shown in Figure 1. The English versions 8.3 and 11, have the title First Love for He,
but the first part of the word Erste (or
First in German) is also Er or
He in English. Inserting an n after Er results in
Ernste Lieb or Serious
Love, which contains Hardt's given name Ernst and
corresponds to the basic, non-inflected form of the German adjective
ernst or earnest. The playful use of the word wart
as an image for heart is another example of translating feelings with
translating words as Freytag-Loringhoven indicates in her note to Barnes on
version 1.3: He and Firstling, she
writes, These two poems are same. I leave
it to you – if you will print both? With that Flayed Heart -/Froze - - - -. I consider it
singular strong enough – to countenance the shriveling of the heart to
the semblance and useless appendix of the heart. Allowing the
reader to navigate our marked associations is an affordance of the
electronic edition and an invitation consider a variety of shifting vantage
points and plausible readings.
Historicization
Certainly, multimedia aspects of Freytag-Loringhoven’s poetry represented by
versions, images, and even encoded text are not new to editorial work or
even to digital editorial work. As well, these vantage points I describe
above are, in some sense hard coded into the edition by
the mark up I used to create the edition. Yet, scholars who reflect the TEI
community’s intentions for increasing interpretive affordances continue to
theorize how XML markup can be made more flexible. It is in the mode of
shifting vantage points which
elucidate shifting relationships
that Alan Renear and David Dubin continue to consider representations of the
document in projects such as the BECHAMEL XML
Semantics Project. Renear and Dubin seek to theorize the identity,
criteria, or individuation conditions of documents as a
method for determining whether
an object x and an object y are the same object
(#renear2003)
. Such differentiation in an information system is key for identifying
and reidentifying, counting, and distinguishing entities. Their specific,
situated, readerly motivations similarly affect their definitions: by document, the authors write,
then we refer to the abstract
symbolic expression which may be physically instantiated repeatedly
and in various media. This use corresponds more or less to the FRBR
term expression [17] and
has the colloquial synonym text
(#renear2003)
. Their goal is to allow for a way to conceptualize overlapping
elements, to move away from the representation of text as structure to the
representation of text as concept, a movement toward further abstraction.
The authors write,
data structures don’t have
paragraphs, they have nodes labeled p;
documents don’t have nodes labeled p, they have
paragraphs
(#renear2003)
. As a result, rather than using the syntactical relationships in XML
DTDs, their strategy is to enable the determination of semantic
relationships where
semantics simply means the
basic facts and relationships that are represented by the occurrence
of XML constructs
(#renear2003)
. The authors argue that using this kind of semantic markup system
means that similarities and partial
identities of various kinds can be identified.
What is unique about Freytag-Loringhoven, what makes her poetry texts
difficult to access through traditional and new practices of literary
analysis in information systems pertains to the temporal and spatial nature
of language play that was so essential to the field of plausible
meaning-making engaged by her poetry (#clement2011).
Certainly, the ability to incorporate editorial subjectivity, audience
collaboration, and a sense of her evolving use of language into the encoding
that comprises Freytag-Loringhoven’s poetry reframes what can be considered
a plausible reading of her poetry. Considering these four properties
(material, institutionalization, socialization, and historicization) for
characterizing documentary practices in a system helps us articulate how the
situated development of the system rather than the mastery of a technology
shapes that field of plausible interpretations.

III. Technologies of Self-Consciousness and Responsibility

The Technology of Self-Consciousness
The technology of self-consciousness in the humanities is very
powerful. Geoffrey Harpham sums up traditional rationales for humanistic study as
[t]he scholarly study of
documents and artifacts produced by human beings in the past [which]
enables us to see the world from different points of view so that we
may better understand ourselves
(#harpham2005)
. He argues for complicating an element of uncertainty, which
solicits its own revision in
an endless process of refutation, contestation, and
modification
(#harpham2005)
. Because it solicits its own
revision, Harpham notes, knowledge in the humanities is produced
by
being aware
(#harpham2005)
or
self-understanding
(#harpham2005)
. Humanists continue to ask, Who are we? What do we do?
The most recent spate of debates about how we become answerable to what we do
in the humanities occurred at the turn into the new millennium when the
debate over the crisis in the humanities sparked a
firestorm of conferences, talks, presentations, articles, chapters and
special journal issues by many humanist scholars seeking to define what
humanists do as a reflection of the epistemological
superstructure
(#mcgann2005)
that considers why, as a culture, we should value the humanities.
Sander Gilman, for example, clarifies self-understanding specifically as
the self conscious awareness
of the methodological approaches that one uses or an awareness
of process (#gilman2012). Louis Menand also
identifies self-aware processes as the defining technology for humanistic
knowledge production by arguing that in developing tools for understanding
ourselves and
everything in the world of
values
(#menand2005)
— what Latour calls
states of affairs
(#latour2004)
— humanists are instantiating the fact of situatedness and ultimately a
necessary skepticism to objectivity .
Similarly, it would be remiss to posit that self-conscious
processes are absent from DH discussions. One does not have to look
further than John Unsworth’s consideration of the importance of failure (#unsworth1997) for
evaluating digital methods, Willard McCarty’s notion of a via
negative or a negative way to knowledge in which we
probe failures through
an iterative, trial-and-error process , Julia Flander’s
productive unease
(#flanders2009)
, and, of course, Smith’s
technology of
self-consciousness
(#smith2005)
to see evidence of the fact that DH scholars have been thinking
critically about how self-consciousness is manifested in DH method.
Specifically, DH has advanced its work as new ways of asking about the very
nature of traditional humanist knowledge production. Willard McCarty wrote
Humanities Computing, for instance,
as an attempt to articulate DH as a dynamic,
new form of traditional
scholarly practice
(#mccarty2005)
that seeks to identify and explore the practice and form of digital
inquiry as it relates to traditional methods and modes of knowledge
production in the humanities (#mccarty2005). He
notes that computing humanists use self-aware practices such as conceptual
modeling, which emphasizes the scholar’s search for genuineness as measured by her
interpretive standpoint. Calling computational models
temporary states in a process
of coming to know rather than fixed structures of knowledge
(#mccarty2005)
, McCarty explains the nature of self-consciousness in working with
computational models:
Compromises made in how a
problem is formulated, the perspective chosen, the components and
relations defined and the model constructed from them sum together
into a result that in general is impossible to validate in any
absolute sense against the real-world object. For the humanities the
only possibility is comparison between the result and the scholar's
own interpretation, hence the privileging of that interpretation
from the beginning.
(#mccarty2005)
As such, McCarty, and others (#bradley2003)
posit modeling as the most rigorous method of analysis as it encourages an
engagement with the processes of knowledge production as opposed to its
product.
On the other hand, it seems that one of the greatest complaints concerning
digital humanities work is not, as some have argued, the lack of
self-consciousness critiques about the humanities that have long been the
purview of the humanities, but rather the lack of self-conscious critiques
about the information infrastructure that affords these critiques. Christine
Borgmann, among others, calls for a social studies of the digital
humanities; she asks, Why is no one following digital humanities
scholars around to understand their practices, in the way that
scientists have been studied for the last several decades?
(#borgman2009). More recently, Don Waters invoked this divide
between practices in the sciences and the humanities by discussing a piece
by Steve Nichols entitled The Anxiety of Irrelevance:
Digital Humanities and Contemporary Literary Theory in
which Nichols, in turn, seems to recapitulate C.P. Snow’s two cultures argument
[1959]. Nichols argues that while engineers and computer scientists ask
How
possible questions (or investigations that seek to describe, explain,
control, or predict material things), humanists ask inherently
divergent Why
possible questions based on critical intelligences . These critical intelligences entail
distinguishing what is
real or given from
what our process of thinking about the object contributes to our
cognition of the thing
(#nichols2013)
. In short, or, in the words of Waters (who is, in turn, paraphrasing
Nichols), critical intelligence comprises an emphasis on
objects of study in the
humanities [that] are characterized by
contingency and irony
rather than truth or falsity
(#waters2013)
. While Nichols disregards the possibility of a transdisciplinary
digital humanities based on the premise that How and
Why questions are incompatible, Waters (like Borgman) uses
Nichols’s argument to encourage more crossover between the sciences and the
humanities in order to better understand
the disciplined methods and
tools associated with the application of critical intelligence in
various kinds of humanistic research
(#waters2013)
that comprise DH projects.
In contrast to this perspective, rigorous DH scholarship demonstrates that
opportunities for critical work are foreshortened when the value of DH is
measured by its potential to produce tools that simply validate pre-existing
theoretical suppositions, rather than DH’s potential to help question these
regimes of theory. As McCarty has argued, all meaningful uses of computing are heuristic,
and therefore that mere delivery is dangerously
misleading
(#mccarty2005). Others have written critically about
objective versus subjective DH method (#drucker2011), the mind
over body divide (#hayles1999), and the fact that the
technologies of access in DH can reify the canon . Most recently, the National Endowment for the Humanities’ Office of
Digital Humanities has changed its start-up grant description, which has
historically been an important funding resource for supporting a generation
of new DH tools and method to include developing new technologies of
self-consciousness including
scholarship that focuses on the
history, criticism, and philosophy of digital culture and its impact
on society
(#NEH)
. So too I have shown here that infrastructural developments reflect
pre-existing epistemologies about truth and
objectivity than can shape the knowledge-production that is
facilitated by systems. I have demonstrated how grounding digital humanities
in work being discussed within information studies affords a perspective
that allows us to see that information systems are themselves situated
within ways of practice that shape our understanding of the plausibility of
certain interpretative standpoints – regardless of whether or not the
objects of study are literary texts or not.
At the same time, while DH has proclaimed and demonstrated (as I have done
here) a self-conscious awareness of process, a sense pervades that this
focus on self-conscious method reflects an unproductive tendency to view
digital humanities as a partial fix for an epistemological and ontological
stasis in the humanities. For Julia Flanders, this tendency is
confusing: it is vague,
utopian, and self-contradictory . . . The rhetoric of digital
changes exists, for the academy, as a way of producing a new
narrative of progress which generates research, and a rhetoric of
transformation that can carry the self-critique that is built into
academic life
(#flanders2009)
. In other words, while measuring a research method’s value by how
well it facilitates our ability to think critically about our own
interpretations is valuable, this focus seems positioned for the sake of
self - consciousness itself — as such, it becomes a technology of
self-consciousness that serves as a means to accomplish
self-critique. A feminist standpoint reminds us that while it is not enough
to say that DH should employ self-conscious methods, it is equally
insufficient to merely be self-conscious about methods, even when this work
is still necessary.
A position shaped by feminist inquiry means understanding that it is our
responsibility to ask if it is possible to use DH work (in this case, the
development of information infrastructure) for emancipatory ends – a
question I am situating within the context of this discussion as an
information science question in DH feminism. In keeping with this
disciplinary viewpoint and to conclude this section, therefore, I will end
by sharing examples of information infrastructure development in DH that
reflect the sense of responsibility DH must engage to go beyond
the technology of self-consciousness toward actions for change.
Responsibility and Located Accountability in DH
The questions that Lucy Suchman posits as a kind of checklist for
located accountability represent an extremely
productive means for making more transparent how we can be responsible for
the kinds of work practices that our developing information systems
engender. Working
relations, Suchman writes,
are understood as
sociomaterial connections that sustain the visible and invisible
work required to construct coherent technologies and put them into
use
(#suchman2002)
. Suchman, who describes that for which we are accountable or
responsible as a reframing of
the locus of objectivity from
an established body of knowledge not produced or owned by anyone, to
knowledges in dynamic production, reproduction and
transformation
(#suchman2002)
, poses some questions for evaluating the manner in which system
production relates to system use that are particularly useful for
disentangling work in DH that reflects activist progress based on humanist
inquiry. Below, I have posed her questionsto introduce some observations about areas in DH where we are
making great strides in critical actions toward emancipatory ends:
Recognizing the various forms of visible and invisible work
that make up the production/use of technical systems, locating
ourselves within that extended web of connections, and taking
responsibility for our participation. The #altac or
alternative career movement, shepherded by Bethany Nowviskie and
popularized on Twitter has done phenomenal work in making the
invisible hands of alternative academics or
non-tenure track staff and faculty part of a now common parlance for
attributing credit broadly across many digital humanities projects
(#nowviskie2011). As a result, professional
organizations such as the Modernist Language Association and the
American Historical Association have sponsored #altac panels and
have published guidelines on evaluating digital humanities projects
as scholarly work. Further, to set this conversation in context,
Evaluating Digital Scholarship
(#schreibman2011) was published in the MLA journal in
Profession (2011) to delineate the
difficulties of assessing aspects of digital scholarship. These
difficulties include the fact that the creation of digital
infrastructure for scholarly inquiry relies on the traditions of
scholarly editing, bibliography, and philology long relegated to
second-class status in the academy . This movement not only
serves to professionalize graduate students for a wider range of
professional careers outside of the academy, it also serves to
provide a platform for more conversations about the work of humanist
inquiry and the role that information infrastructure must play in
the academy in the digital age.
Understanding technology use as the recontextualization of
technologies designed at greater or lesser distances in some
local site of practice. Jay David Bolter and Richard
Grusin’s Remediation [1999], Wendy
Chun’s Programmed Visions [2013], Lisa
Gittelman’s Always Already New: Media, History,
and the Data of Culture [2008], and Matt Kirschenbaum’s
New Media and the Forensic
Imagination [2008], Lev Manovich’s Software Takes Command [2013], and Johnathon Sterne’s
MP3: The Meaning of a Format [2012]
are just a few of the seminal texts in digital humanities that have
been essential in identifying historical, social and cultural
contexts behind text, images, and sound that affect our current
practices of building and imagining digital humanities
infrastructure. These texts form a platform off of which more work
must be done to articulate not only the new media technologies that
shape how we perceive and build information systems but the humanist
technologies that also influence (and have always influenced) these
practices.
Acknowledging and accepting the limited power of any actors
or artifacts to control technology production/use.
Continued conversations concerning Open Access Scholarship
and online education are other areas of deep concern to professional
DH organizations. The digital humanities community has been
particularly keen on advocating for open access with the ODH
requiring open-source software and the community developing a
variety of open-access, peer-reviewed journals (Digital Humanities Quarterly and Digital Studies / Le champ numérique) as well as
publishing a slew of seminal texts in open-access book venues [; (#nowviskie2011); ; (#hirsch2012) to name a
few]. Further, the ACH (Association for Computing in the Humanities)
has gone to great lengths to help support open access and fair use
in DH by joining the DH community in filing two amicus briefs in
lawsuits related to digitization of in-copyright and orphaned works
in the Google Books and HathiTrust corpora. Spearheaded by Matthew
Jockers, Matthew Sag, and Jason Schultz on behalf of the DH
community, the briefs describe how DH scholars employ innovative
data-mining techniques in ways consistent with fair use, and how
scholarship could be held back if this kind of research is not
well supported by the courts.Please see http://www.ach.org/ach-advocacy-news. As of
October 11, 2012, based in part on the evidence from these briefs,
the United States district court ruled favorably for continued fair
use in digital research.
Establishing new bases for technology integration, not in
universal languages, but in partial translations. This
notion, that technological integration can never be universal, that
some voices are and will always be excluded, is crucial for
understanding this recommendation in terms of DH movements that seek
to include multiple perspectives in DH. Virtual communities such as
NITLE (National Institute for Technology in Liberal Education),
HASTAC (Humanities, Arts, Science, and Technology Advanced
Collaboratory), and DHCommons as well as the DH Training
NetworkThe Training Network includes the following
international training institutes: DHSI at the University of
Victoria, DH@Oxford at Oxford University, DH@Leipzig at Leipzig University, DHWI at the
University of Maryland, College Park, DH@Bern
at the University of Bern, and Brown at Brown University. institutes have
provided essential virtual and real networking spaces for students,
emerging and experienced scholars to become familiar with the
theories and technologies of DH. Other grassroots movements have
included THATCamps Please see http://thatcamp.org/. which are locally organized
unconferences where participants gather at low
costs to familiarize and deepen their understanding of DH debates
and practices. Further, ADHO (Alliance of Digital Humanities
Organizations) — which has recently expanded to include the
Australasian Association for Digital Humanities (aaDH) and the
Japanese Association for Digital Humanities (JADH) — has developed a
Conference Code of Conduct [2013]
in the tradition of code4lib, the American Library Association, the Digital
Library Federation, and the Association for Computing Machinery, which lays out
principles to encourage a welcoming
conference environment that respects personal, cultural, and
linguistic differences. Please see
http://adho.org/administration/conference-coordinating-program-committee/adho-conference-code-conduct.
Further, groups such as Accessible Future (link: http://www.accessiblefuture.org/), Postcolonial Digital
Humanities (link: http://dhpoco.org/), and Transformative Digital
Humanities (link: http://transformdh.org/) seek to include voices in DH
from communities that have not been well represented. Finally, DH
continues to see a surge of interest and activity around the world
from groups such as the Red de Humanidades Digitales (RedHD) (link:
http://humanidadesdigitales.net/) and new centers in
Brazil, India, Israel, and South Africa (link: http://www.dhcenternet.org/).
Valuing heterogeneity in technical systems, achieved through
practices of artful integration, over homogeneity and
domination. With multiple grant categories that support
increasing access through digitization to supporting training and
research institutes to funding advanced method and tools and
international collaborations, very few entities have made as great
an impact in their attempt to diversify the thinking and the work of
DH than the Office of Digital Humanities at the National Endowment
for the Humanities or the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation which has
repeatedly supported projects for change in research, scholarship,
and teaching. Don Waters sees the road ahead (situated in terms of
what Mellon is already and would, in the future, like to fund)
leading into six areas: (1) institutional infrastructure development
that serves expressed scholarly needs; (2) digital media
preservation; (3) tools and infrastructure that span the three
primary areas of work in digital humanities (i.e., textual, spatial,
and visual analysis) such as annotation, named entity
identification, and prosopographies; (4) more tools that facilitate
analysis in visual, spatial, and audio as well as areas outside the
three areas mentioned above; (5) a better understanding of scholarly
needs in publishing and curation and the necessary infrastructural
capacities in cultural and academic organizations for such work; (6)
training for scholars and students to understand and engage
imaginatively in tool-based modes of intellectual pursuits is a
further imperative (#waters2013)

To conclude, these are just a few examples of areas of information
infrastructure development projects in DH that directly relate to the
emancipatory design goals outlined by Suchman. As Haraway has written,
We need the power of modern
critical theories of how meanings and bodies get made, not in order
to deny meanings and bodies, but in order to build meanings and
bodies that have a chance for life
(#haraway1988)
. Using feminist inquiry to understand the nature of information
science questions within digital humanities helps us to articulate how we
might fulfill our responsibility to become answerable to how information
infrastructure impacts meaning-making in the humanities as well as action in
the digital humanities.

Abel, Elizabeth. Mania, Depression, and the Future of Theory, Critical Inquiry 30.2
(2004): 336–339.
ACH Advocacy News The Association for Computers and the Humanities, October 11, 2012, http://ach.org/blog/2012/10/11/ach-advocacy-news/.

Alliance of Digital
Humanities Organizations 2014 Conference Code of
Conduct
http://adho.org/administration/conference-coordinating-program-committee/adho-conference-code-conduct
Bardzell, Shaowen,
and Jeffrey Bardzell. Towards a Feminist HCI Methodology:
Social Science, Feminism, and HCI, Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. New York, NY, USA: ACM,
(2011): 675–684.
Barthes, Roland. Image, Music, Text. Hill and Wang, New York
(1977).
Berg, Marc. The
Politics of Technology: On Bringing Social Theory into Technological
Design, Science, TechnologyHuman Values, 23:4 (Autumn 1998):
456-490.
Bolter, Jay David, and Richard A.
Grusin. Remediation: Understanding New Media. MIT Press, Cambridge (1999).
Borgman, Christine L. “The Digital
Future is Now: A Call to Action for the Humanities,” digital humanities
quarterly, 3:4 (Fall 2009).
Bowker,
Geoffrey, and Susan Leigh Star. Sorting Things Out. MIT Press,
1999.
Bradley, John. Finding a Middle Ground Between Determinism and
Aesthetic Indeterminacy: a Model for Text Analysis
Tools.
Literary and Linguistic Computing (2003): 185–207.
Briet, Suzanne. What is Documentation? R. E. Day and L. Martinet (trans.).
Scarecrow Press, Lanham, MD (2006).
Bryant, John. The
Fluid Text: A Theory of Revision and Editing for Book and Screen.
University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor (2002).
Bryant, John. Where Is the Text of America? Witnessing Revision and the Online Critical
Archive. In Earhart, Amy E. and Jewell, Andrew (eds), The American Literature Scholar in the Digital Age.
University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor 2011.
Buckland, Michael K. Information as Thing, Journal of
the American Society for Information Science, 42.5 (1991):
351–360.
Buckland, Michael. What is a document?, Journal of the American Society for Information
Science, 48. 9 (1997): 804-809.
Carter, Rodney G. S. Of Things Said and Unsaid: Power, Archival Silences, and Power
in Silence,
Archivaria, 61 (2006): 216-233.
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. Programmed Visions: Software and Memory. MIT Press,
Cambridge (2013).
Clement, Tanya. Knowledge Representation and Digital Scholarly Editions in Theory and
Practice,
Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative, 1.1
(2011).
Clement, Tanya. Space for Hire: Alternate Careers in Academic
Inter-Spaces, In Nowviskie, B., ed. Alternative
Academic Careers for Humanities Scholars MediaCommons Press (2011).
Clement, Tanya. Multiliteracies in the Undergraduate Digital Humanities Curriculum: Skills,
Principles, and Habits of Mind. In Hirsch, Brett (ed), Teaching Digital Humanities, Open Book Publishers
(2012).
Clement, Tanya. Text Analysis, Data Mining, and Visualizations in Literary
Scholarship.
In Literary Studies in a Digital Age: A Methodological
Primer. Price, Ken and Siemens, Ray (eds), Modern Language
Association, New York (2013).
Davidson, Cathy and
David Theo Goldberg. A Manifesto for the Humanities in a
Technological Age.
Chronicle of Higher Education, February 13,
2004.
DeKoven, Marianne. A Different Language: Gertrude Stein’s Experimental
Writing. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison (1983).
Derrida, Jacques. Margins of Philosophy. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago and London (1982).
Drucker, Johanna. Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display.
Digital Humanities Quarterly 5.1 (2011): n. pag.
Web.
Digital Humanities Start-up Grant Guidelines National
Endowment for the Humanities. Retrieved from http://www.neh.gov/grants/odh/digital-humanities-start-grants on 14
December 2012
Drucker, J. Blind Spots: Humanists must plan their digital future.
Chronicle of Higher Education, 55:30 (2009).
Drucker, J. Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display,
Digital Humanities Quarterly, 5.1 (2011).
Earhart, Amy E. Can Information Be Unfettered?: Race and the New Digital Humanities
Canon. In Gold, Matthew (ed), Debates in the
Digital Humanities. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
(2012).
Earhart, A. and Jewell, A. The American Literature Scholar in the Digital Age.
University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor (2010).
Ensmenger, Nathan L. The Computer Boys Take Over: Computers, Programmers, and the
Politics of Technical Expertise. MIT Press, Cambridge (2010).
Feinberg, M. From Hidden Bias To Responsible Bias: An Approach To Information Systems
Based On Haraway’s Situated Knowledges,
Information Research, 12.4 (2007).
Feinberg, M. Information System Design For Communication: The Use Of Genre
As A Design Element,
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, Vancouver, BC, November
6-11, 2009.
Feinberg, M. Ethos And The Construction Of A Believable Character For
Information Systems, iConference 2009 Proceedings, February 9-11,
2009, Chapel Hill, NC.
Feinberg, M. Two kinds of evidence: how information systems form rhetorical
arguments,
Journal of Documentation, 66.4 (2010):
491-512.
Flanders, Julia H. Digital Humanities and the Politics of Scholarly Work,
PhD thesis, Brown University (2005).
Flanders, Julia. The Productive Unease of 21st-century Digital
Scholarship,
Digital Humanities Quarterly, 3:3 (2009).
Frohmann, Bernd. Deflating Information: From Science Studies to
Documentation. University of Toronto Press, Scholarly Publishing
Division, Toronto (2004).
Frohmann, B. Documentation Redux: Prolegomenon To (Another) Philosophy Of
Information,
Library Trends, 52.3 (2004): 387-407.
von
Freytag-Loringhoven, Elsa. The Firstling/Erstling/He
Complex. Clement, Tanya and Divay, Gaby (eds), Scholarly Editing: The Annual of the Association for Documentary
Editing, 33 (2012).
von
Freytag-Loringhoven, Elsa. Selections from the Letters of
Elsa Baroness Von Freytag-Loringhoven. Barnes, Djuna (ed), Transition, 11 (1928): 19–30.
Gammel, Irene. Confessional Politics Women’s Sexual Self-representations in Life Writing
and Popular Media. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press
(1999).
Gilman, Sander L. Collaboration, the Economy, and the Future of the Humanities,
Critical Inquiry, 30.2 (2004): 384–390.
Gitelman, Lisa. Always Already New: Media, History and the Data of
Culture. MIT Press, Cambridge (2008).
Gold, Matthew (ed). Debates in the Digital Humanities. University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis (2012).
Greetham, David C. Textual Scholarship: An Introduction. New York:
Routledge (1994).
Haraway, Donna. Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of
Partial Perspective,
Feminist Studies, 14.3 (1988): 575–599.
Harding, Sandra G. The Science Question in Feminism. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca (1986).
Harpham, Geoffrey Galt. Beneath and Beyond the Crisis in the
Humanities,
New Literary History: A Journal of Theory and
Interpretation 36.1 (2005): 21–36.
Hawkesworth, M. E. Feminist Inquiry: From Political Conviction to Methodological
Innovation. Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick (2006).
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics,
Literature, and Informatics. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
(1999).
Hirsch, Brett D. Digital Humanities Pedagogy: Practices, Principles and Politics.
OpenBook Publishers, Cambridge, UK (2012).
Jameson, Fredric. How Not to Historicize Theory,
Critical Inquiry, 34.3 (2008): 563–582.
Kirschenbaum, Matthew G.
What is Digital Humanities and What is it doing in
English Departments?
ADE Bulletin, 150 (2010).
Kirschenbaum, Matthew G.
Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic
Imagination. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press (2008).
Latour, Bruno. Why Has Critique Run Out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of
Concern.
Critical Inquiry, 30.2 (2004): 225–248.
mastery.
Oxford Dictionaries. Oxford University Press (2010).
Manovich, Lev. Software Takes Command. Continuum Publishing
Corporation, New York (2013).
McCarty, Willard. Humanities Computing. Palgrave Macmillan, New York
(2005).
McGann, Jerome. A
Critique of Modern Textual Criticism. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago (1983).
McGann, Jerome. Culture and Technology: The Way We Live Now, What Is to Be Done?
New Literary History, 36.1 (2005): 71–82.
McGann, Jerome. The Rossetti Archive and Image-Based Electronic Editing. In
Finneran, Richard (ed), The Literary Text in the Digital
Age. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor (1996): 145–184.
McKenzie, D. F. Bibliography and
the Sociology of Texts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (1999).
Menand, Louis. Dangers Within and Without.
Profession (2005): 10–17.
National Endowment for the
Humanities Digital Humanities Start-up Grant
Guidelines National Endowment for the Humanities. Retrieved from
http://www.neh.gov/grants/odh/digital-humanities-start-grants on 14
December 2012
Nichols, Stephen G. The Anxiety of Irrelevance: Digital Humanities and
Contemporary Literary Theory. Academia.edu (2013)
Nowviskie, B., ed. Alternative Academic Careers for Humanities Scholars.
MediaCommons Press (2011).
Otlet, Paul. International Organisation and Dissemination of Knowledge: Selected Essays
of Paul Otlet. In Boyd, Ed. W. (ed) Elsevier for the International
Federation of Documentation (1990).
Oudshoorn, Nelly, Els
Rommes, and Marcelle Stienstra. Configuring the User as
Everybody: Gender and Design Cultures in Information and Communication
Technologies.
Science, TechnologyHuman Values, 29.1
(2004): 30–63.
Perloff, Marjorie. Differentials: Poetry, Poetics, Pedagogy. University
of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa (2004).
Poirier, Richard. The Difficulties of Modernism and the Modernism of
Difficulty. In Hoffman, Michael and Murphy, Patrick D (eds), Critical Essays on American Modernism. G.K. Hall
Company, New York (1992): 104–114.
Renear, Allen, and David Dubin. Towards Identity Conditions for Digital Documents.
Proceedings of the 2003 International Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata
Applications: Supporting Communities of Discourse and Practice — Metadata
Research and Applications. Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (2003): 19:1–19:9.
Schramm, Wilbur Lang and
Donald F. Roberts. The Process and Effects of Mass
Communication. University of Illinois Press, Urbana (1971).
Schreibman, Susan, Laura
Mandell, and Stephen Olsen. Evaluating Digital
Scholarship,
Profession, 2011.1 (2011): 123-201.
Schreibman, Susan,
Siemens, Ray and Unsworth, John (eds). A Companion to
Digital Humanities (Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture).
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing (2004).
Wilfrid Sellars. Science, Perception and Reality, RoutledgeKegan
Paul Ltd; London, and The Humanities Press: New York, 1963; reissued in 1991 by
Ridgeview Publishing Co., Atascadero, CA.
Shannon, Claude Elwood. The Mathematical Theory of Communication, University
of Illinois Press, Urbana (1971).
Simpson, Megan. Poetic Epistemologies: Gender and Knowing in Women’s Language-oriented
Writing. State University of New York Press, Albany (2000).
Smith, Martha Nell. Taking the Man Out of the Humanities: How Feminism and
Technology Are Transforming the Discipline. In Berkin, Carol, Appel,
Carole, and Pinch, Judith (eds), Exploring Women’s Studies:
Looking Forward, Looking Back. Prentice Hall, New Jersey (2005):
301-317.
Snow, Charles Percy. The Two Cultures,
Cultural capital,
The New Statesman (Jan 2013).
Sterne, Jonathan. MP3: The Meaning of a Format. Duke University Press Books, Durham,
NC (2012).
Suchman, Lucy. Located Accountabilities in Technology Production.
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 14.2
(2002).
Svensson, Patrik. From Optical Fiber To Conceptual Cyberinfrastructure,
Digital Humanities Quarterly 5:1 (Winter
2011).
A Gentle Introduction to XML. TEI, (2004) http://www.tei-c.org/Vault/P4/doc/html/SG.html.

Little Review Records. University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Libraries, Archives Department. http://digital.library.wisc.edu/1711.dl/wiarchives.uw-mil-uwmmss0001

Unsworth, John. The Importance of Failure. December 1997.
Wajcman, Judy. From Women and Technology to Gendered Technoscience.
Information, Communication and Society, 10:3
(2007), 287-298.
Waters, Don. “An Overview of the
Digital Humanities.” Research Library Issues: A Report from ARL, CNI, and SPARC
284 (2013).
Weaver, Warren. Recent Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Communication.
In Shannon, Claude Elwood, The Mathematical Theory of
Communication, University of Illinois Press, Urbana (1949).
Williams, Raymond. The Politics of Modernism: Against the New
Conformists. Verso, London (1996).
Witmore, Michael. Text: A Massively Addressable Object. In Gold, Matthew
(ed), Debates in the Digital Humanities.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press (2012).

