A Pedagogy for Computer-Assisted Literary Analysis:
                    Introducing GALGO (Golden Age Literature Glossary
                    Online) 
Nuria Alonso García
Alison Caplan
Brad Mering
28 August 2017

If teaching is largely about
faculty-student interaction, then we have to recognize that human
interaction is changing.
(#bowen2012)


New tools that foster new insights
into work with the ever increasing amount of digital data available to us
are not a luxury but a necessity: who better to develop them than humanists
who have both a knowledge of the content domain and of the content as
data.
(#schreibman2010)
Introduction
The dialogue between the digital and the humanities has not been fluid and continues
to raise skepticism among a majority of humanists in this third decade since the
advent of the field of Digital Humanities (DH). A primary concern is the ready
appropriation of empiricist rather than humanistic methods of inquiry in the
creation of DH tools. Johanna Drucker is among the most vocal in lamenting that
computer generated humanities scholarship, by in large, seeks positivistic, strictly quantitative, mechanistic, reductive and
literal scientific ends, and undermines the humanities’
constructivist approach to knowledge
as knowing, observer dependent, emergent, and process-driven rather than
entity-defined
(#drucker2012)
. DH scholars are creating, with powerful platforms that support large corpus
processing, data mining and modeling, ever more complex and innovative projects that
nonetheless mute, in Drucker’s view, the core critical principles and affective
experiences that have traditionally lay at the heart of work in the humanities.
The subject of this paper, GALGO (Golden Age Literature Glossary Online) was developed with a humanistic
method of inquiry in mind and may resolve the issues raised by Drucker and offer new
pedagogical insights into computer-assisted reading and analysis of texts. The
potential benefits of the introduction of instructional platforms such as GALGO within the larger field of Digital Humanities, are
multiple: 1) a wide variety of small scale digital text analysis projects, like
those suggested on the MLA Commons site, Literary Studies in
the Digital Age, can be developed for classroom use and then elaborated
on if proven to be of value, 2) students, more adept at using digital technology,
will be able to contribute in significant ways to tool developmentand to engage in professional scholarship
mentored by faculty (#InmanBerens2014), and 3) the role that
the cultural canon performs within local and global societies can be more broadly
and effectively explored, enabling the humanities discipline to undergo a much
needed change.
In the domain of digital text analysis, Franco Moretti’s celebrated distant
reading model seems to bear out the same epistemological divide discussed
above. Illuminating and potentially canon busting, the manipulation of massive
datasets suggests more innovative means by which to evaluate formal and generic
literary conventions, but involves
a little pact with the devil: we know
how to read texts, now let’s learn how not to read them
(#moretti2013)
. At the same time a hybrid approach, that combines distant reading practices
with close or traditional ones, as we adopted in GALGO, is spawning new non-empirical interpretive
paradigms in which (machine) computational methods and (human) qualitative analyses
interact dynamically to explore
new ways of reading or, just as
important, new understandings of how we have always read
(#liu2012)
. Web-based text analysis and visualization tools are being reimagined as
vehicles that allow scholars to perform a range of hermeneutical and creative
functions, from instantiating dominant literary-critical theories [; (#clement2013); ] to playing with or
altering a text’s language and form (#sinclair2003)
The impulse to bridge distant and close reading strategies emerges naturally in 21st century college and high school classrooms, where
educators must respond to the ubiquitous use of technology by students, their
shorter reading span (#hayles2010) and their need for distraction.
When genuinely affected by the material, today’s learners also exhibit a capacity
for disciplined reading and study,
Young people in online forums are
engaging in close reading activities directed toward popular music or cult
television shows sometimes engaging in prolonged and impassioned debate
about what such works mean and how they convey their meanings
(#jenkins2013)
. The goal in the college classroom should not be to allow for open-ended
digital play and exploration of the kind that professional humanities scholars are
motivated to undertake, because as one learner noted,
The amount of information can truly be
overwhelming, and a large part of the success of this exercise seems to lie
in not only how to use the [digital] tools to the best advantage, but
in…avoiding dead-ends
(#fyfe2011)
. The pedagogical objective, then, is to foster curated opportunities for
students in the humanities to engage in theoretically informed learning that takes
full advantage of new media methods (#drucker2012)
(#brier2012). As instructors, we can play an important role in
ensuring that they get a critical vocabulary for thinking about the intersections
between media, language and culture (#jenkins2013) and they
interact with literary texts meaningfully.
In this paper we first introduce readers to GALGO’s
social semiotic model for digital literary analysis, then we describe in detail
GALGO’s technical apparatus and illustrate its
functionality, and lastly we discuss multimodal literacy and reflect on GALGO’s potential to engage 21st century learners in classic literary analysis.

1. A Social Semiotic Model for Digital Literary Analysis: Accessing the
Language of Golden Age Spanish Culture
With increasing frequency over the last decade, students in our foreign language
literature classes remark that they often find it difficult to relate to terms
and themes in the canonical works that they are studying since they perceive
them as obsolete and irrelevant. Students want to read literature that reflects
their concerns and that offers them ways to address those concerns from varied
perspectives. The main pedagogical challenge, then, lies in guiding students to
see the interconnectedness between early modern and
contemporary language usage at the semantic and syntactic levels.
Our research has demonstrated that the keyword analysis developed by British
cultural historian Raymond Williams provides a particularly amenable approach
for engaging students in the study of foreign language and literature, honing in
as it does on charged social and political terms that span societies and time
periods (#garc). Williams’ methodology, namely, identifying
problem-laden words or keywords, interpreting their meanings in various
contexts, and reflecting critically on clusters of associated words, serves to
bring to the fore in any text an array of linguistic and historical questions to
be researched and discussed. The keyword sociolinguistic framework allows for
an exploration of the vocabulary
of a crucial area of social and cultural discussion, which has been
inherited within precise historical and social conditions and which has
to be made at once conscious and critical – subject to change as well as
to continuity
(#williams1983)
. Keywords are
large words
(#hart2005)
that are polysemic, used often and in at least two different situational
contexts, and
patterned towards important
social ends
(#halliday1989)
. For Williams, in the mid-20th century, they
were: culture, society, democracy, class, etc. For students of Golden Age Spain,
they tend to be moral and social terms inflected by the period’s dominant
philosophical concerns; for example, fuerza (1.
courage, 2. brute strength, 3.
the force of truth) and gentileza (1. cultivated manner and
appearance, 2. moral uprightness). The polysemy
of a word can be so extensive that it may include conflicting meanings as in
voluntad (1. the rational
will, part of the human soul, that seeks the moral good, 2. free choice, 3. uncontrolled sexual
desire).
Undergirding William’s keyword study is a social semiotic theory of language,
which understands language as text delivered in a specific context of social
interaction and constructed from linguistic codes derived from the culture . From this theoretical perspective, the situational
context determines the text, and textual analysis should reflect a movement from
the outside inwards:
We have taken as our starting
point the observation that meanings are created by the social system and
are exchanged by the members in the form of text…. Persistence and
change in the social system are both reflected in text and brought about
by means of text… text as the semantic process of social
dynamics
(#halliday1978)
.
Yuri Lotman, in his groundbreaking work on a semiotic theory of culture, finds
the language of literary texts to be the best vehicle for identifying specific
semiotic codes prevalent among different social groups in different historical
periods.
In the literary text there is an
optimal correlation whereby the conflicting structures are disposed not
hierarchically but dialogically on the same level. This is why a
literary narrative is the most flexible and effective modeling mechanism
for describing extremely complex structures and situations in their
entirety
(#lotman1990)
. Cultural semiotics justifies the study of the literary canon as a rich
source of cultural memory, a portrait of the peculiar idiosyncrasy of an era,
and an open examination of social and racial taboos. In the case of Spanish
culture, reading Cervantes and his Golden Age contemporaries, bears this out:
Los
caracteres peculiares de nuestro idioma no han tenido manifestación
literaria más amplia, varia y plena que en las obras
cervantinas (The works of Cervantes exhibit the
most sweeping, most varied, and fullest representation of the unique
attributes of our language) .
GALGO, an online glossary of select keywords from
the Spanish Golden Age, The first four works that have been input into the
database are: El Abencerraje. La historia de
Abindarraez y la hermosa Jarifa, La
Celestina, El Lazarillo de Tormes y de
sus fortunas y adversidades, and La
Numancia. The first five keywords are: esfuerzo, fuerza, gentileza, honra, and voluntad.
seeks to instantiate language as social semiotic by linking the semantic
configurations of a literary text simultaneously to the cultural environment,
the linguistic system, and the social system . The computer is an ideal semiotic machineto expose these overlapping layers of
meaning. Applying the conceptual design of M.A.K. Halliday’s social semiotic
model, GALGO’s interpretive apparatus provides the
field of discourse or context of situation for the
text in which a specific keyword appears. The field of
discourse presents clusters, word groupings of semiotic affinity that
describe the social action that is taking place in the text. GALGO also performs an interpretation of the tenor of discourse, highlighting sociological variables
connected to class status, gender role and racial category that refine a
keyword’s meaning from the perspective of interpersonal relationships. Finally,
GALGO adds commentary on
discursive structures, such as patterns of grammar, syntactic nuances, and
figurative language, that surround the keyword in the text.
This method encourages students to unravel the cultural genealogy of pivotal
terms that resist easy signification
and whose lexical value(s) often differ from today’s. All keyword definitions
undergo a multilayered social semiotic analysis that can be compared and
contrasted across texts:
You’ve got to see the text as an
actualized potential; which means that you have got to study the
potential…. We are interested in what a particular writer has written
comparatively against the background of what he might have written,
against the background of other things he has written or that other
people have written
(#halliday1978)
. In this way, GALGO guides learners to
pursue the deep connections that exist between language, literature, and
society.
2. The Digital Tool: Navigating GALGO
GALGO is under construction and can be accessed
at http://glossary.mervideo.us/
GALGO’s strength resides in the synchronic
connectivity that the system facilitates when identifying the constellation of
meanings for any given keyword. From a technical perspective, the database
development has been a complex process, requiring multiple prototypes of the
glossary and many iterations of interface applications. The system must have the
ability to identify the absolute position of all uses of a keyword across
multiple texts and perform this task in an efficient way, so that large texts
can be managed and search times minimized for both users and system
administrators. GALGO is constructed in such a way
that users can not only access existing analysis within the database, but also
can assume, when instructed to do so, the role of the system administrator and
contribute their own annotations.
When a user logs on to read a particular literary work, the document is loaded
first into a browser frame. Once the work is loaded, it opens the user side
interface. The user interface is straightforward, so that one can quickly locate
specific keywords in the work, view definitions, and visualize the web of
semantic relationships that surround those keywords. A persistent navigation
system lists the keywords in the database to the far right of the literary work
and gives the multiple definitions for each word. There are hyperlinks to the
17th and 18th
century Spanish dictionaries from which the definitions are taken and GALGO’s English translations are derived. The
Tesoro de la lengua castellana o española
(Treasure of the Castilian or Spanish
Language) by Sebastián de Covarrubias, published in 1611, can be
found at http://fondosdigitales.us.es/fondos/libros/765/16/tesoro-de-la-lengua-castellana-o-espanola/,
and the three-volume 18th-century Diccionario de autoridades (Dictionary of the Royal Spanish Academy) is located at http://web.frl.es/DA.html.
Figure 1 is a screenshot taken from GALGO that illustrates the multiple definitions for
the keyword honra, its conjugations, under
Variations, in the La Celestina and
links to all of the uses of honra. One can, at
any time, browse a work by keyword, clicking on a specific instance through
Uses in this Work and navigate to that textual location.

Users can opt to read the entire work linearly, viewing it as a single continuous
page. When they come to a highlighted keyword, they click on that word to see
the specific contextualized definition. That specific definition is given, along
with links to other places where that definition appears, both in the work being
read as well as in other works in the database. The purpose of the glossary is
not simply to trace the usage of a particular word but rather to trace the usage
of a particular definition of a particular word across many texts. Figure 2 and Figure 3
show screenshots of the same definition for honra in two different works, La
Celestina and El Abencerraje. Comparing
these distinct analyses of the definition, by exploring Other Places this
Definition is Found, serves to expand and clarify its meaning for the
reader.




GALGO’s main feature is a powerful clustering
analysis tool that allows users to see how a particular definition of a keyword
is determined. A list of grouped terms given in the field of
discourse reveals the pertinent vocabulary to focus on in and around
the keyword. The analysis of the role relationships in a literary passage
appears as the tenor of discourse identifying social
discourse categories at play such as identity, class, ethnicity, or gender.
Finally, the commentary box links form with content,
deciphering the relevant rhetorical strategies. Figure
4, Figure 5 and Figure 6 offer views across different works that detail the
interwoven strands of meaning.





The process of data entry and keyword annotation has been successfully
streamlined for system administrators in this current version of GALGO. To create a new text, all the administrator
needs to do is fill out a simple web form, providing a title, specific metadata,
and uploading a TEI XML encoded text file. Once uploaded, the text document is
read into a buffer. The document is stored on the server in its unaltered state,
so it can be used later as an inviolable document of record. The search index
contains every keyword in the work and its absolute position in that work. Each
word also contains an absolute unique identifier, allowing the system to quickly
locate that word in every other work.
Administrators enter a keyword manually, and the application scans the document
to find and highlight every instance of the keyword and prepares a list of those
keywords in the database. When administrators click on an undefined usage,
either in the document, or in the word use list, an editing interface opens. In
this interface, a definition from a list of definitions already associated with
the keyword can be selected, or a new definition can be entered. Upon
submitting, the definition is associated with both the keyword itself and with
the particular usage selected. The clustering tool allows administrators to
annotate these definitions, explaining why certain word clusters are key to
understanding the text, referencing both field and tenor of discourse. A client
side selection tool permits the administrators to determine the boundaries of
the text by choosing neighboring terms to cluster with the keyword. These words,
their position in the text, and the keyword itself together make up the field of
discourse.
GALGO is comprised of a team of faculty and student
administrators who are building the database with research previously collected
in Spanish Golden Age literature seminars. Providence College students have
utilized the social semiotic methodology underlying GALGO for several years now with successful outcomes both in terms
of their growth as language majors and critical thinkers . Currently, the keyword analysis
completed in these classes is being input, and following that work, the system
will be expanded to include five additional literary works from the period and
five new keywords. The project has received public recognition from Providence
College, the digital humanities community, and the local Rhode Island
Spanish-speaking media. Listen to the most recent interview with the
authors and a student researcher on Rhode Island Latino Public Radio: http://lprnoticias.com/2016/05/13/podcats-galgo-providence-college-entrevista-con-el-dr-pablo-rodriguez/.
Given that the sophisticated and powerful digital architecture behind GALGO can accommodate any set of works, whether in
another language or another discipline, we are in the process of seeking
feedback from a broader audience of colleagues and students. Focus groups will
be conducted to test the platform’s capabilities and discuss its applicability
beyond the field of Spanish literary studies. The nature of GALGO’s new analytical and visualization functions will be impacted
by the results of the focus group sessions. Future system development might
include advanced language manipulation and search functions. In particular, it
might include language specific stemming index algorithms that would make it
possible to match natural language terms and clusters across multiple works.
There could also be a quantitative facet to the cluster analysis that would
determine the keyword’s distributional profile According to the
Distributional Hypothesis, the distributional profile (DP) of a word is
determined by the strength of association of the word with co-occurring
words in the text [(#rubenstein1965); ; (#pantel2005) (DP) with
respect to underlying semantic relationships. GALGO’s interface could be enhanced to provide dynamic views that
reveal the distribution and intricacy of clustered lexical webs across any
corpus.
3. Multimodal Literacy: Blending Old Literature with New Media
Students in the 21st century are equipped with a set
of literacy skills, honed through their extensive interactions on social media,
that enables them to communicate instantly with combinations of words, images,
and videos. The intertextuality of messages and unlimited data stream as well as
the participatory atmosphere of cyberspace have expanded the ways in which young
people amass knowledge, understand concepts, and interact in the world. In their
high school and college classes, the Google Generation,
inclined to interact with texts more freely, is reluctant to interpret meaning
solely in the context of a single mode and expects to generate its own questions
with respect to the subject matter (#calandra2005)
(#giglio2009). Arguably, faculty today have the responsibility to
meet students on their turf and honor their existing interests and expertise
(#jenkins2013) to better support them in their long term
intellectual pursuits (#bowen2013)
An entirely new textual
landscape has emerged as a result of on screen communication environments . Just as occurred with the introduction of
printing over five hundred years ago, information technology is spawning new
practices of creating, reading, and interpreting texts. Digitized documents
represent a vast expanse of varied data that can be instantaneously searched,
sorted, and categorized. The theory of multimodal literacy
(#kress2003) posits that assimilating the semiotic resources of
written language, audiovisual images, and interactive elements on screen is a
distinct but not incompatible exercise from that of print-based reading and
writing.
Textuality as such survives the
technological revolution intact. Electronic technology does not replace
the text but actually extends and supplements certain features of
textuality by increasing our power to switch between texts of various
kinds
(#harpham2005)
. The interactive modality offered by the electronic medium has led to a
form of reading coined hyperreading, computer-assisted human reading that
includes strategies such as skimming, hyperlinking, and scanning . Our digital tool, GALGO, is founded on hyperreading:
It enables a reader quickly to
construct landscapes of associated research fields and subfields; it
shows ranges of possibilities; it identifies texts and passages most
relevant to a given query; and it easily juxtaposes many different texts
and passages
(#hayles2010)
.
Nicholas Carr says this reliance on digital multimedia disembodied textsis altering the depth not only of our
thoughts but also of our emotions. Certainly, hyperreading has its fair share of
detractors (#hayles2010), and Carr is the most cogent voice in
arguing that it spawns shallow thinking (#carr2010). But, in other
significant ways, textual fragmentation captures what the study of language has
always entailed: looking through language to the reality that it represents and
looking at the language that represents it (#kramsch2002). By
highlighting patterns, parallelisms, and intertextual juxtapositions,
hyperreading draws on visual techniques used in viewing a paintingand aligns well with the rich tradition of
annotation found in cultural artifacts of earlier historical periods:
Before the mid 18th century, many Western readers, if they
read at all, sampled from a variety of texts for which a linear reading
would not be advisable: periodicals, almanacs, collections, the
Bible…
(#jenkins2013)
.
Multimodal learners employ hyperreading to navigate the Web according to their
own interests and intuitively perceive reading and writing as social, cultural,
and creative processes rather than simply as motor skills or linguistic acts
(#gee2010). O’Halloran and Lim define the multimodal literate person as one who is
sensitized to the meaning
potential and choices afforded in the production of the text, rendering
an enhanced ability to make deliberate and effective choices in the
construction and presentation of knowledge
(#ohalloran2011)
. Technology offers opportunities for discourse analysis that the fixity of one graphic
representation-the printed page(#jewitt2005) cannot
and frees the reader to create multiple paths and relate with the text in a
personally meaningful way.
We believe, then, that textual analysis in the digital era has the potential to
connect readers in more direct ways with primary sources from the distant past.
By ensuring that close reading
interacts synergistically with the kind of Web and hyperreading in which
our young people are increasingly immersed
(#hayles2010)
, students of the humanities can surpass space and time boundaries and
effectively activate the
meaning-generating
mechanism
(#lotman1990)
of older canonical literature.
Text and readership seek mutual
understanding. They adapt to each other. A text
behaves like a partner in dialogue: it re-orders itself (as far as its
supply of structural indeterminacy allows) in the image of the
readership. And the reader responds likewise, using his or her
informational flexibility for the restructuring which will draw him or
her closer to the world of the text
(#lotman1990)
.
Conclusion
The vitality of literary classics depends on the ability and interest of each new
generation of readers to participate actively in a process of continuous
semantic (ex)change. In alignment with this objective, GALGO prioritizes two functions that other text analysis
applications like Voyant (#sinclair2016), NVivo software and Paper
Machines do not: curation and contextual meaning. GALGO allows a professor to create a curated exhibit in order to
help students see the ebb and flow of particular words throughout a set of
works. Voyant, for example, is good at showing the usage cases of a particular
word across a work, but there is no way for a student, encountering a complex
work for the first time, to make semantic connections without help.
Additionally, with GALGO, students can annotate a
text themselves, and a professor can review their work, creating opportunities
for guided self-discovery and in-depth conversation. These other tools do not
afford this because they lack the capacity to promote genuine collaboration on
research.
Finally, GALGO allows a student to look beyond the
word itself and trace contextual meaning, rather than just the word. A term is
always connected to several different possible definitions. These other tools
only show the uses of a particular word and do not help a student understand
that the same word can mean very different things depending on the fields and
tenors of discourse. It is unclear how useful it is just to see all the
instances of a given word, especially for students with limited knowledge of a
particular work, its period or even of the language in which it is written. By
showing the range of definitions for the keywords and allowing students to
browse by one or more definitions, GALGO exposes
how the meanings of the keywords both recur and vary across texts.


Alonso García, N.
and Caplan, A. Reading the World’s Classics Critically: A
Keyword-Based Approach to Literary Analysis in Foreign Language
Studies.
Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, 11.2 (2014):
100-120.
Bowen, J.A. Teaching Naked: How Moving Technology Out of Your College Classroom Will
Improve Student Learning. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco (2012).
Bowen, T. and Witthaus, C.
Multimodal Literacies and Emerging Genres.
University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh (2013).
Brier, S. Where’s
the Pedagogy? The Role of Teaching and Learning in the Digital
Humanities. In M.K. Gold (ed), Debates in the
Digital Humanities (2012) http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/8.
Calandra, B. and Lee, J.K.
The digital history and pedagogy project: Creating an
interpretative/pedagogical historical website.
The Internet and Higher Education, 8.4, (2005):
323-333.
Carr, N. The
Shallows: What the Internet is Doing to Our Brains. W.W. Norton
Co., New York (2010).
Carrington, V. New textual landscapes, information and early
literacy. In J. Marsh (ed), Popular Culture,
New Media and Digital Literacy in Early Childhood. Routledge, New
York (2005): 13-27.
Clement, T. Text Analysis, Data Mining, and Visualizations in Literary
Scholarship.
Literary Studies in the Digital Age: An Evolving
Anthology. MLA Commons (2013). https://dlsanthology.commons.mla.org/text-analysis-data-mining-and-visualizations-in-literary-scholarship

Crane, G. Classics
and the Computer: An End of the History. In S. Schreibman, R.
Siemens,J. Unsworth (eds), A Companion to Digital
Humanities. Blackwell, Oxford (2004): 46-55.
Drucker, J. Humanistic Theory and Digital Scholarship. In M.K. Gold (ed),
Debates in the Digital Humanities (2012). http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/34
Fernández Gómez, C.
Vocabulario de Cervantes. Prólogo de Rafael
Lapesa. Real Academia Española, Madrid (1962).
Fyfe, P. How to Not
Read a Victorian Novel.
Journal of Victorian Culture, 16.1 (2011):
84-88.
Gee, J.P. A Situated
Social-Cultural Approach to Literacy and Technology. In E.A. Baker
(ed), The New Literacies. Multiple Perspectives on Research
and Practice. The Guilford Press, New York (2010): 165-193.
[Giglio and Venecek 2009]
Giglio, K. and Venecek, J. The Radical Historicity of
Everything: Exploring Shakespearean Identity with Web 2.0.
Digital Humanities Quarterly, 3.3 (2009). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/3/000063/000063.html
Halliday, M.A.K. Language as Social Semiotic. The Social Interpretation of
Language and Meaning. University Park Press, Baltimore
(1978).
Halliday, M.A.K. and
Hasan, R. Language, Context, and Text: Aspects of Language
in a Social-Semiotic Perspective. Oxford University Press, Oxford
(1989).
Halliday, M. and
Matthiessen, C. An Introduction to Functional
Grammar. Routledge, London (2004) 3rd
ed.
Harpham, G. G. Beneath and Beyond the Crisis in the
Humanities.
New Literary History, 36.1 (2005): 21-36.
Hart, R., Jarvis, S., Jennings, W.
and Smith-Howell, D. Political Keywords: Using Language
that Uses Us. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2005).
Hayles, K. N. How
We Read: Close, Hyper, Machine.
ADE Bulletin, 150 (2010): 62-79. http://nkhayles.com/how_we_read.html
Inman Berens, K. Interface.
Digital Pedagogy in the Humanities. Concepts, Models, and
Experiments. MLA Commons (2014). https://digitalpedagogy.commons.mla.org/keywords/interface/
Jenkins, H. and Kelley,
W., (eds) Reading in a Participatory Culture: Remixing
Moby-Dick in the English Classroom. Teachers College Press, New York
(2013).
Jewitt, C. Multimodality, Reading, and Writing for the 21st Century.
Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of
Education, 26.3 (2005): 315-331.
Jewitt, C., and Kress, G.
(eds) Multimodal Literacy. Peter Lang, New York
(2003).
Kramsch, C. Language and Culture: A Social Semiotic Perspective.
ADFL Bulletin, 33.2 (2002): 8-15.
Kress, G. Multimodality: A Social Semiotic Approach to Contemporary
Communication. Routledge, LondonNew York (2010).
Kress, G. Literacy
in the New Media Age. Routledge, LondonNew York
(2003).
Kress, G. and van
Leeuwen. T. Multimodal Discourse: The Modes and Media of
Contemporary Communication. Arnold, London (2001).
Lapesa, R. Prólogo. In Fernández Gómez, C. Vocabulario de
Cervantes. Real Academia Española, Madrid (1962).
Lambert, J. Digital Storytelling: Capturing Lives, Creating Community. Digital
Diner Press, Berkeley (2002).
Liu, A. The State of
the Digital Humanities: A Report and a Critique.
Arts and Humanities in Higher Education, 11.1-2
(2012): 8-41.
Lotman, Y. M. Universe of the Mind. A Semiotic Theory of Culture. I.B. Taurus
Co., London, England (1990).
Marsh, J. (ed) Popular Culture, New Media and Digital Literacy in Early Childhood.
Routledge, New York (2005).
Moretti, F. Distant Reading. Verso Press, London, England (2013).
Nicholas, D. and Clark,
D. Reading in the Digital Environment.
Learned Publishing, 25.2 (2012): 93-98.
Nilsson, M. Developing voice in digital storytelling through creativity, narrative and
multimodality.
International Journal of Media, Technology and Lifelong
Learning, 6.2 (2010): 148-160.
O’Halloran, K. L. and
Lim, F. V. Dimensioner af multimodal literacy. Viden om
Læsning. 10, (2011) 14-21.
Olsen, M. Signs, Symbols and Discourses: A New Direction for Computer-Aided
Literature Studies.
Computers and the Humanities, 27. 5-6 (1993-1994):
309-314.
Pantel, P. Inducing ontological co-occurrence vectors. In Proceedings of the 43rd Conference of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, ACL’05, (2005) 125–132.
Ramsey, S. Toward
an Algorithmic Criticism.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 18.2 (2003):
167-74.
Ramsey, S. and Rockwell,
G. Developing Things: Notes Toward an Epistemology of
Building in the Digital Humanities. In M.K. Gold (ed), Debates in the Digital Humanities (2012). http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/11
Rubenstein, H.
and Goodenough, J. Contextual correlates of
synonymy.
Communications of the ACM, 8.10, (1965):
627–633.
Saif M. and Graeme, H. Measuring Semantic Distance Using Distributional Profiles of
Concepts.
Computional Linguistics, 1,1, (2006): 1-34.
Schreibman, S. and
Hanlon, A. M. Determining Value for Digital Humanities
Tools: Report on a Survey of Tool Developers. Digital Humanities
Quarterly, 4.2 (2010). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/2/000083/000083.html
Schütze, H. Dimensions of meaning. In Proceedings of the
1992 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing, Supercomputing’92 ,
(1992): 787– 796.
Sinclair, S. Computer-Assisted Reading: Reconceiving Text Analysis.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 18.2 (2003):
175-184.
Sinclair, S. and Rockwell, G.
Hermeneutica Computer-Assisted Interpretation in the
Humanities. MIT Press, Cambridge (2016).
Walsh, M. Multimodal literacy: What does it mean for classroom practice?
Australian Journal of Language and Literacy, 33.3
(2010): 211-239.
Walsh, M. Pedagogic
Potentials of Multimodal Literacy. In Tan Wee Hin, L., and
Subramanian, R. (eds.), Handbook of Research on New Media
Literacy at the K~12 Level: Issues and Challenges I and II. IGI
Global, U.S. (2009): 32-47.
Williams, R. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. Oxford University
Press, New York, NY (1983) 2nd ed.

