Renaissance Remix. Isabella
                        d’Este: Virtual Studiolo
Deanna Shemek
Antonella Guidazzoli
Maria Chiara Liguori
Giovanni Bellavia
Daniele De Luca
Luigi Verri
Silvano Imboden
31 December 2018

1 Introduction

IDEA: Isabella d'Este Archive Homepage.


Isabella d’Este: Virtual Studiolo borrows its
conceptual framework from four domains: the humanistic field of Renaissance art
history; the theory and practice of museum curation; current thinking in
cultural heritage reconstruction about sentiment analysis, and the
technical-creative disciplines of digital modeling, animation, remixing, and
remastering. The project aims to reassemble in a virtual, open-access
environment one of Renaissance Italy’s most stunning courtly art collections,
the studiolo of Isabella d’Este (1474-1539), marchesa of the city-state of
Mantua. The Virtual Studiolo will join a set of already existing, interlocking
projects gathered in the multimedia online environment of IDEA: Isabella d’Este
Archive (http://isabelladeste.web.unc.edu) (fig.
1). As a complex, IDEA provides resources for the study of the Italian
Renaissance through the figure of one of its most distinguished and celebrated
women, Isabella d’Este.
2 Isabella d’Este’s studiolo
Breaking with much more modest practices by noblewomen who owned small galleries
of family portraits and religious images, Isabella set out shortly after her
marriage (1490) to Marchese Francesco II Gonzaga to design a full-blown personal
studiolo (study) and an adjoining smaller room she called the grotta (grotto).
These camerini (little rooms) functioned as personal retreats for reading and
reflection but also as galleries for the display of Renaissance learning and
luxuries and as private performance spaces for Isabella’s music. A purposeful
projection of her ideal self, they were created both for her own pleasure and
for exhibition to privileged visitors (#liebenwein2005)
(#sanjuan1991)
(#cartwright1903). Isabella managed her acquisitions largely
through voluminous written correspondence with artists and dealers, directing
the lavish decoration of these rooms with intarsia panels, gilded ceilings,
frescoes, tiles, and enigmatic personal emblems. She also filled them with
treasures she collected, including books, cameos, Roman antiquities and
Renaissance bronzes. Dominating the studiolo was a series of large paintings
that now hang prominently in the Italian galleries of the Louvre: two each by
Andrea Mantegna, Lorenzo Costa and Antonio Allegri da Correggio, and one by
Pietro Perugino.
As a signature instance of personal branding, Isabella’s
studiolo stands on a historic par with Granduke Francesco de’ Medici’s later
studiolo in the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence and those of Duke Federico da
Montefeltro in Urbino and Gubbio (the latter now transplanted to New York’s
Metropolitan Museum of Art). It also holds special significance as a collection
that anticipated the achievements of such modern female collectors as Isabella
Stewart Gardner in Boston, Etta and Claribel Cone in Baltimore, and Peggy
Guggenheim in Venice. Isabella’s camerini were an unparalleled architectural and
artistic expression of specifically feminine Renaissance culture. In their
sensory and intellectual density, they functioned as a space for contemplative
withdrawal but also for display, and as a controlled environment in which the
human passions could be summoned and engaged while also remaining safely
contained (#campbell2006). One of this project’s aims is to allow
visitors to experience the sensory power of the studiolo in a virtual
environment.
Both for its coherence and for the gender of its creator, Isabella’s studiolo is
a regular point of reference in the study of Renaissance history and art, yet
for centuries it has been accessible only in dispersed pieces and spaces
depopulated of major works and artefacts. As documented in detail by the late
Clifford M. Brown, the rooms remain but have sustained significant renovations;
many of the studiolo’s paintings and sculptures survive, but they belong to
museums around the world (#brown2005)
Given the dispersal of their Renaissance contents, it has been impossible to
approximate the experience of these rooms as fully appointed and purposefully
designed. Today researchers, students, and visitors are limited to looking at
books, slides, and variously published online images; they may also listen to
limited examples of recorded music. Visiting Mantua’s Ducal Palace in person, on
the other hand, one finds empty rooms whose former glory can only be imagined.
For a brief tour of the rooms of Isabella’s second studiolo as it appears today,
see the video Ad tempo taci’: Songs for Isabella
d’Este (see 6:00 ff.) (#macneil2015)
Current digital technology — photogrammetry, 3D modeling, the virtual reassembly
of dispersed collections, and augmented reality display — offers the possibility
of creating a remastered studiolo, a virtual space in which
both visual and acoustic elements will be enhanced with respect to previous
attempts at its representation. Yet historical uncertainty about numerous
details in Isabella’s arrangement of the objects in her collection compels us to
present, and to argue, this project as itself a hypothetical and interactive
remix: a media artefact that inevitably alters the original through processes of
reconstruction, supplementation, subtraction, and reorientation to create
something unquestionably new.
Adding to the complexity of efforts to visualize the historic studiolo is the
fact that Isabella had it constructed twice, in two different locations at
different times in her life, and the two versions of these spaces are in
different states of repair and restoration. If one premise of our endeavour is
that the virtual integration of the studiolo’s contents will foster
understanding of collecting and display, of the studiolo as an early modern
project, and of Renaissance culture broadly conceived in ways that have been
unattainable for centuries, another is that a single, definitive, and statically
authentic restoration of these historic spaces is not
only impossible, but also undesirable. We view the Virtual Studiolo as an
opportunity to acknowledge the dynamism of collecting and curating as cultural
practices, today as well as in the sixteenth century.
Accordingly, we are aiming to present both our own curation of the studiolo as
it has been researched and documented by art historians, and also the
opportunity for users to move objects in and out of the spaces, rearranging and
adding contents in newly-authored configurations — remixes — that may be saved
for personal use or publication. Currently we anticipate the use of Blend4Web
(https://www.blend4web.com) as
the framework both for navigating our own, proposed arrangement of the historic
studiolo and for programming a customisable environment for future users. In
anticipation of this phase of the project, the Samuel H. Kress Foundation (www.kressfoundation.org/) funded a
concept-demonstration video that allows us to present some of the project’s
foreseeable further developments. We would welcome feedback on this material,
which users may offer either by contacting us through the IDEA project’s home
page: (http://ideaart.web.unc.edu/virtual-studiolo-studiolo-virtuale/), or
by filling out our short User Story survey: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1nbhkt7W0nHwVh76EOiQNtH-IfkKlRARPtD7UAoKzPVM/viewform?edit_requested=true
.
3 Directing the concept demo-video
The design and development phase of the demonstration video for Isabella d'Este: Virtual Studiolo aims to illustrate
concisely and effectively to potential funding agencies the attractions of a
complex project such as the Virtual Studiolo, while also raising awareness
regarding the range of disciplinary collaborations and knowledge bases required
for its realization (http://ideaart.web.unc.edu/virtual-studiolo-studiolo-virtuale/). For
this purpose, we chose to produce an emotionally captivating video presenting
both the historic space of the studiolo, as a 3D reconstruction resulting from a
photogrammetric campaign, and a small selection of objects from the collection
once housed in it. The video, for example, opens on a vortex of Isabella’s
letters, which alludes to the surviving correspondence that documents the
studiolo’s acquisitions and that is viewable in another IDEA project, IDEA Letter/e. It shows two musical instruments
represented by intarsia panel carvings in the historic studiolo — a lute and a
spinet — which recall the love for music that led Isabella to commission songs
that she played on those instruments (and which are the focus of several
projects in IDEA Music/a). It shows ceramics that
she received as a gift from her daughter (featured in the IDEA Ceramics project located in IDEA
Art/e). And it also features a high-resolution rendering of one
object from her collection, a precious, jewel-encrusted medallion engraved with
her portrait, for which image we benefited from the engaged collaboration of
Vienna’s Kunsthistorisches Museum (Figure 2), and
lower-resolution renderings of several sculptures belonging to her collection.
The studiolo is thus presented as a full-scale Wunderkammer devised by a woman
who has been called the
first lady of the
Renaissance
(#bini2001)

(#ferino)
(#pizzagalli2001)

Gian Cristoforo Romano’s medal of Isabella d’Este. Image courtesy of the
Kunsthistorisches Museum of Vienna. Reconstructed in 3D, it is one of the
virtual objects shown in the video.

Our challenge was to present in just under six minutes the state of the historic
studiolo today and, at the same time, to simulate projected phases of
implementation that will involve virtual reconstructions, assembly of dispersed
objects, online exhibitions, and several other tools that digital technology can
offer for preserving and accessing cultural heritage, in particular for
educational purposes (Figure 3). We sought, as
well, to present the range of research options that a remastered studiolo will
offer, and to integrate our protagonist, Isabella d’Este, whose portrait at a
certain point peers out from the video as if to claim her role as
author of the studiolo, as a driving force behind its
decades-long ideation and construction.

Seven large paintings by Andrea Mantegna, Lorenzo Costa, Antonio Allegri
da Correggio and Pietro Perugino, now hanging prominently in the Italian
galleries of the Louvre, materialize once more inside Isabella’s
studiolo.

Conceived as an introduction and invitation to the project, the video is a
compact whole that is separated into two parts. The first, more creative,
emotional and evocative segment is accompanied by an insistent, contemporary
music track by Kai Engel that carries a certain driving force. The second
segment includes a sound track of music from Isabella’s time. This sequence is
especially important, as it conveys both the participant credits, which range
across disciplines and institutions, and technical information about the
potential evolution of the project. The video’s conclusion opens out onto new
horizons for study and educational itineraries that are now possible thanks to
digital media. Our project is therefore consciously a marriage of the current
renaissance of art and technology with the historic, Italian Renaissance from
which we draw inspiration and knowledge.
4 Technical issues
The creation of the video began with a photographic campaign for the
photogrammetric acquisition of the historic studiolo and grotta in Mantua’s
Ducal Palace. More than 500 photos were taken inside each of Isabella’s two
rooms at a 36-Megapixel resolution. The photogrammetric reconstruction, with
PhotoScan (www.agisoft.com/) (Figure 4), produced the following results:

for the studiolo, starting from 574 photos, the software was able to
align 574, creating a dense point cloud of 110,945,015 points with
11 million vertices and eight 4096*4096 pixel textures;


for the grotta, starting from 620 photos, the software was able to
align 492, creating a dense point cloud of 122,408,100 points with
12 million vertices and four 4096*4096 pixel textures.

Photogrammetric reconstruction of the studiolo in PhotoScan.

The 3D models were then imported and optimised in Blender. The mesh was
duplicated and divided into macro areas (ceiling, walls, floor) and further
subdivided into smaller zones. On the bare walls we applied a
planar decimation, while on the rougher or more irregular areas
of the mesh — such as those corresponding with the intarsia on the ceiling — we
applied a collapse decimation. The output of this process was a
mesh with a lower level of detail (100/200.000 vertices) that is suitable for
full-room renderings. For close-up shots, instead, segments of the
full-resolution mesh were used.
As for the textures, since PhotoScan does not optimize UV unwrap,
the mesh had to be manually subdivided through seams, in
order to isolate planar areas and perform a new manual unwrap. Two techniques
were applied. Blender standard unwrap was used for the more
irregular portions, with a relax post-processing passage for better
smoothing out of irregularities. The second technique we adopted was a
project from view.
In some areas, such as those with the intarsia wooden panels or the richly
coffered ceiling, we obtained a higher level of resolution by scaling the
UV island; for an immediate visual feedback we applied a 4K
resolution UV grid texture (Figure 5). The mesh
material was configured in order to use a new empty texture for the colour. In
this instance, the colour information obtained with bake was
transferred from a high poly mesh to an optimized one.

UV grid texture applied to the studiolo 3D model within Blender.

Several other techniques were also key for the video: fluid simulation, for ink
and sealing wax drops (Figure 6); a series of
particle simulations, for the vortex of letters; Blender animation nodes for the
spreading of the floor tiles; and 3D photo matching, for Isabella’s portrait.
For a credible representation of the ink and sealing wax drops, the Blender
fluid simulator was programmed with the real physical density of the two
substances. Moreover, for sealing the wax, Blender modifiers and shapekeys were
used, as explained in the tutorial we have shared on the VisitLab blog (http://visitlab.cineca.it/?p=1771
).

Final simulation effect of sealed wax on one of Isabella d’Este
letters.


As for the vortex of Isabella’s letters, three main particle systems and two
auxiliary ones were created, the latter for adding random dynamics. The main
particle systems created the three movements of the shot: the ascending
movement of the letters, the vortex and its explosion (Figure 7). A further particle system, with
keyed particles, was added to these three for managing the transitions among
them. Images of five of Isabella’s actual letters were used instead of point
particles.
Final interpolation between the particle systems, from the vortex to the
explosion of the letters.

For the animation of the floor tiles, a significant contribution came from the
online community, thanks to the add-on Animation nodes (https://github.com/JacquesLucke/animation_nodes) and Archimator, a
pre-set of configurable nodes for the creation of groups of objects: (http://blenderartists.org/forum/showthread.php?350296-Addon-Animation-Nodesp=3013604viewfull=1#post3013604)
(Figure 8).
The reconstructed tiled floor of the studiolo.
The Titian portrait of Isabella d’Este was recreated with 3D photo
matching using the tool Make Human (www.makehuman.org/).
Our desire to create a short video that would convey the many possible
applications of Virtual and Augmented Reality technologies that the Virtual
Studiolo project could engage, including gaming and 3DWeb and that would, at the
same time, entice viewers and involve them in a kaleidoscope of these
possibilities, led us to an extensive use of visual effects created in Blender:
animation, paint-brush based scenes, morphing, plays of light and shadow and, as
noted above, the physical simulation of fluids and the use of node compositing
(Figure 10).
All that we have achieved during the creation of this concept demonstration
video will constitute a solid basis for future developments of the Virtual
Studiolo project, but it also demonstrates more generally the use of
environments, objects and animations that is possible with current visualization
and interaction technologies, some of which are briefly suggested in the visuals
accompanying the closing titles of the video.

A still from the closing titles, showing a possible Augmented Reality
application to be developed in the future phases of Isabella d’Este: Virtual Studiolo

5 The Virtual Studiolo: a new kind of cultural object
Immersive Virtual Reality (VR) technology offers unprecedented tools for
meaningful encounters with historic sites and virtual restoration of structures
that have been damaged, altered, or destroyed over time
(#roussou2002)
(#dylla2010). Photogrammetric surveys of surviving architectural
spaces and objects, digital animation, 3D modeling, virtual acoustics, mapping,
and digitized documentation enrich these new forms of access to historically
remote artefacts. Yet persisting in these new technologies are enduring
questions regarding all historical representation. Whose perspective is
reflected in the finished product? How open is it to interpretation and
revision? What active roles can users play in the VR experience? How can these
products move beyond mere illustration or single-narrative recreational
experiences to inspire new knowledge? Isabella d’Este:
Virtual Studiolo aims to build a multi-sensory, document-integrated,
interactive environment that confronts these issues. It will highlight scholarly
understanding of this celebrated studiolo (including uncertainties, which
abound), while also inviting user experimentation, interrogation, and customized
storytelling to offer a dynamic contemporary experience of the Renaissance
culture that the studiolo exemplifies (#liebenwein2005).
Museums and cultural sites aim to provide meaningful learning experiencesthat, as an outcome, very often produce a sort of
paternalistic form of
educative leisure
(#franklin2017)
that appeals to a narrow audience. In order to broaden the audience and
achieve better results, the communicative approach is gradually shifting toward
a different perspective. Understanding that learning and feeling are entangled,
that emotions play a role in attention and memory, recent research has
increasingly stressed the importance of emotive experiences in learning . We consider emotionally evocative applications to be
crucial for the future developments of Isabella d’Este:
Virtual Studiolo as well. Our video itself relies upon a visually
compelling first segment before giving way to a second segment that presents
more direct illustrations of devices, technologies, and products, suggesting our
aspiration to mobilize these to communicate elements of Isabella’s
Weltanschauung (a new inflection of what art historian Michael Baxandall termed
the period eye) , by running plausible simulations of the studiolo
and grotta environments. Additionally, it shows that 3D virtual environments may
be connected to digital archives of letters, music and objects from Isabella’s
life and, vice versa, by means of bidirectional paths and interactive,
personalised setups.

One of Isabella’s dinner plates undergoing a digital process of colouring
after showing a hint at the original technique used by ceramicists for
transferring complex drawings onto ceramics.

Numerical simulations, which are an established practice in the sciences, allow
us to re-create plausible scenarios that increase our knowledge of natural
phenomena by means of mathematical and physical models under different initial
conditions and constraints. Similarly, taking as a point of departure IDEA’s
digital archive of Isabella’s letters, we illuminate our documentary sources for
understanding her early modern world through immersion in a 3D reconstruction of
her studiolo, aiming for a scholarly and creative experience that lies in an
overlapping dimension between historical research, game and dream. In this
project focused on Isabella d’Este’s studiolo, finally, we confirm lessons
learned at VisitLab from our previous experiences with the concept of Talking
Monuments, where databases and surviving artifacts are merged in a virtual
environment (#borgatti2004), as well as insights stemming from
Cineca’s numerical simulations of the eruptions of Vesuvius .
We have already tested several types of navigation and user participation
employing a variety of technologies, most immediately within the Blend4Web
framework. Appropriate adjustments to models and textures for a real-time
performance, combined with JavaScript-HTML5-CSS3 programming, will allow users
to move around inside the Virtual Studiolo, to interact with objects and
writings, to read historical information and metadata, and even to customize the
explored environments without needing to install any particular application. Any
browser supporting WebGL, even on handheld devices, through a Web address and in
a fully transparent way, will provide the user with all the resources necessary
to run our application (Figure 9).
Emotionally compelling Virtual Reality experiences have the potential to appeal
to a wide and diverse audience and to achieve long-lasting learning impacts.
Firsthand testimonials, oral histories and memories are typical means for
achieving these effects, in Virtual Museums as well as in traditional exhibits.
Where such authentic responses are unavailable, scripted storytelling may
provide information that engages visitors, as for example in the Etruscanning
project (#pietroni2014), where narration is carried out by two
fictional versions of the people buried in the Etruscan so-called
Regolini-Galassi tomb. Interactivity is a further means for engaging visitors’
undivided attention; adding immersivity to the experience promises to achieve
even higher levels of involvement, with interactions that are attainable either
in real-life settings or in virtual ones, or in both at the same time . As Perry et al. observe,
no coherent framework of practice
(neither a conceptual model, nor practical guidelines) yet exists for
designing and evaluating emotive experiences for the cultural heritage
sector at large
(#perry2017)
. The Virtual Studiolo will accordingly aim for a range of possible
outputs designed to elicit positive user feedback. We will privilege narration,
interactivity, immersivity (#champion2016), and aesthetic/emotive
involvement for all visitors to the Virtual Studiolo, while also offering
powerful new tools for teaching and research on the Italian Renaissance.

Detail from end titles showing a possible immersive virtual reality
application to be developed in future phases of the Isabella d’Este Virtual
Studiolo project.

Integration of the studiolo’s surviving features (tiles, doorways, ceiling
decoration) with its former contents (paintings, instruments, sculptures, books,
clocks) will support research on Renaissance design and collecting.
Moveable contents will acknowledge scholarly debate
about their original arrangement and allow users to test hypotheses about
display and curation. At the same time, we also anticipate that users may
experience the Virtual Studiolo’s space and objects as a playable medium, exploring through a
game-like environment the choices, intentions, and tacit judgments that may have
informed Isabella’s decisions (#wardrip). Interfaces
with other IDEA projects will encourage deeper exploration of the relations
between the collection, the collector, and her historic cultural milieu.
For a more immersive experience, both the studiolo and the grotta will be
available in HMD applications, with specific exports of the scene designed for
navigation with headsets (Figure 11). We also
anticipate the creation of special projections inside physical immersive spaces,
such as CAVEs, coupled with user tracking to enable a natural-feeling
interaction with the objects contained in the Virtual Studiolo.
Finally, Isabella d’Este Virtual Studiolo is conceived as a multi-location,
cross-media opportunity that aims both at the general public and at a specific
audience of researchers. Our reflections on this spatial multiplicity and its
potential realizations include not simply the two levels of real and virtual
space, but also multiple potential real interfaces within the current Ducal
Palace in Mantua, with its empty, historic studiolo, and any other reproductions
of the studiolo that might merge real and virtual layers. In the case of the
real studiolo, for example, the museum’s director has considered the possibility
of installing physical copies of the paintings and other artefacts pertaining
historically to these rooms. Spatial augmented reality could, however, provide
another solution (#bimber2005), where projections of virtualized
objects would be superimposed over the real space and could be accompanied by
animations and other elements capable of increasing people's involvement. In
such a realization, the virtual information layer could be integrated almost
seamlessly inside the real world, reducing the estrangement factor for non
3D-experts (#ridel2014). Outside the Ducal Palace of Mantua, it is
also possible to set up a simulated studiolo made of real bare walls, in plywood
for example, and 3D printed or reconstructed objects, such as furniture or 3D
printed copies of works of art, to be used as simulacra of the objects
visualized inside the virtual world. Here, visitors would experience a situation
of hyper reality, with a seamless intermixture of physical and virtual worlds
(#tiffin2005). Since the construction of projects such as the
Museum of Pure Form (#loscos2004), where a complex haptic system
was elaborated for giving users full and realistic interactions with sculptures
inside a virtual environment, the realism of virtual reality experiences has
improved exponentially. At present, environments such as The Void (https://www.thevoid.com/), a hyper reality environment for gaming
defined by the company as VR you can feel, represent a possible frontier
for Digital Cultural Heritage as well. Such a level of immersivity and
realism may suit both scholarly and general audiences.
360 degrees of free movement combined with environmental audio would simulate a
lifelike experience that opens new perspectives for researchers on topics that
will be no longer isolated but rather clearly interconnected with other
dimensions of research on Isabella’s life and milieu. A still further step may
be that of setting up a collaborative virtual reality environment
(#berford2017) to create a working space that is compatible with a
hyper reality experience.
Sentiment analysis techniques (#liu2010), may enable forms of Big
Data analysis to enhance even further our knowledge of the intimate social space
of the studiolo. The capacity to extract participant sentiment automatically is
important in today’s world of commercial marketing, while measuring public
sentiment has become a primary tool for political analysis . Big data produced through the sophisticated algorithms
of social media like Twitter and Facebook are the digital outcomes of these
efforts (#pak2010). In the case of Isabella’s cultural patrimony,
her voluminous collections (of letters, music, and works of art) may represent
future digital corpora for sentiment analysis and opinion mining tools, and a
challenge for the development of new Artificial Intelligence networks. Might new
neural networks, developed and trained by interdisciplinary scholarly teams,
inquire into Isabella’s digital, multimedia heritage in search of new
perspectives on the Big Data concentrated in this minute, historic space?
6 Conclusions
Our challenge in the study of Isabella d’Este’s famous multimedia studiolo is to
learn from a variety of data sources that are relatively sparse, in order to
realize a multimodal dataset that can be experienced in a specific spatial
context: the Virtual Studiolo. Multiple data sources within the project will
complement each other, and their careful fusion will increase knowledge about
Isabella d’Este, her practices as a collector, and the values of her time. As
the Virtual Studiolo develops, we will focus on immersive technology through
CAVE and museum-situated applications to add to this project the critical
dimensions of scale and spatial proprioception. In both the desktop and the 3D
immersive applications that will be our initial products, we attend to the
textures and the aesthetics of this space, not only as principles of beauty but
also in the shaping of a sensorium where Renaissance visitors affirmed their own
values, desires, and emotions. We would welcome feedback from readers on the
video or the project as a whole.
Acknowledgements
Following submission of our proposal (with video) in 2018, the Virtual Studiolo
project was awarded a National Endowment for the Humanities Digital Advancement
Grant, Level II, for 2019-2020. This generous support will enable construction
of phases one and two of five proposed, foundational phases of the environment.
The authors wish to thank: Peter Assmann (Palazzo Ducale di Mantova); Anne
MacNeil, Molly Bourne, Stephen Campbell, Daniela Ferrari, Lisa Regan (IDEA
project); Luca Govoni, Micaela Spigarolo (Cineca); Francesca
del Torre, Stefan Zeisler, Christian Mendez (Kunsthistorisches Museum Wien);
Dominique Thiebaut (Musée du Louvre); and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New
York.
The realization of the concept-demonstration video was supported by the Samuel
H. Kress Foundation, the University of California, Santa Cruz, and the
Kunsthistorisches Museum Wien.


Baxandall, Michael. Painting and Experience in Fifteenth-Century Italy.
Oxford University Press, New York (1972).
Barcelo, Juan A,
Maurizio Forte, and Donald H. Sanders, eds. Virtual reality
in archaeology. ArcheoPress (BAR International Series S 843), Oxford
(2000).
Berford, Bruna, Carlos
Diaz-Padron, Terry Kaleas, Irem Oz, and Penney Devon. Building an animation pipeline for VR stories. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2017
Talks (SIGGRAPH '17). Article 64, 2 pages. ACM, New York (2017). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3084363.3085092.
Bimber, Oliver, and Ramesh
Raskar. Spatial augmented reality: Merging Real and Virtual
Worlds. A.K. Peters/CRC Press, Natick MA (2005).
Bini, Daniele, (ed.). 2001. Isabella d’Este. La prima donna del Rinascimento. Vol.
112 supplement, Civiltà Mantovana. Bulino-Artiglio, Modena and Mantua (2001).
Borgatti, Claudio and Luigi
Calori, Tiziano Diamanti, Mauro Felicori, Antonella Guidazzoli, Maria Chiara
Liguori, Massimo Alessio Mauri, Sofia Pescarin, Luigi Valentini. Databases and Virtual Environments: a Good Match for
Communicating Complex Cultural Sites. SIGGRAPH PROCEEDINGS 2004.
ACM, Los Angeles (2004).
Brown, Clifford M. Isabella d’Este in the Ducal Palace in Mantua: An overview of Her Rooms in
the Castello di San Giorgio and the Corte Vecchia. Bulzoni, Rome
(2005).
Campbell, Stephen. The Cabinet of Eros: Renaissance Mythological Painting and the
Studiolo of Isabella d’Este. Yale University Press, New Haven and
London (2006).
Cartwright [Mrs. Ady], Julia.
Isabella d’Este Marchioness of Mantua 1474-1539. A
Study of the Renaissance. John Murray / E. P. Dutton, London and New
York (1903).
Champion, Erik. Entertaining the similarities and distinctions between serious
games and virtual heritage projects. Entertainment Computing 14,
Elsevier (2016): 67-74.
Dong, Yuanfa, Mark Webb, Carlo
Harvey, Kurt Debattista, Alan Chalmers. 2017. Multisensory
Virtual Experience of Tanning in Medieval Coventry. Eurographics
Workshop on Graphics and Cultural Heritage 2017. The Eurographics Association
(2017). DOI:10.2312/gch.20171297.
Ferino-Pagden, Silvia,
(ed.). La Prima Donna del
Mondo: Isabella d’Este, Fürstin und Mäzenatin der
Renaissance. Ausstellungskatalog des Kunsthistorisches Museum,
Vienna (1994).
Franklin,
Adrian and Nikos Papastergiadis. 2017. Engaging with the
Anti-Museum? Visitors to the Museum of Old and New Art.
Journal of Sociology 53, no. 3: (670 - 686). First
Published June 6, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1177/1440783317712866.
Dylla, Kimberly, Bernard Frischer
et al. Rome Reborn 2.0: A Case Study of Virtual City
Reconstruction Using Procedural Modeling Techniques. In College Art
Association 2009. Making History Interactive. 37th
Proceedings of the CAA Conference March 22-26, 2009, Williamsburg, VA.
Archaeopress, Oxford (2010): 62-66.
Guidazzoli, Antonella
Tiziano Diamanti, Francesca Delli Ponti, Augusto Neri, Marina Bisson, Tommaso
Espositi Ongaro, roberto Gori, Maria Teresa Pareschi, Luigi Calori, Silvano
Imboden, Carlo Cavazzoni, Giovanni Erbacci, Gianluca Menconi. An Interactive Virtual Environment to Communicate Vesuvius
Eruptions: Numerical Simulations and Pompeii History. In SIGGRAPH
Proceedings 2006 . ACM, Boston (2006).
Liebenwein, Wolfgang. Studiolo. Storia e tipologia di uno spazio culturale.
Edited by Claudia Cieri Via. Fanco Cosimo Panini, Ferrara (2005).
Liu, Bing. Sentiment
Analysis and Subjectivity. in Nitin Indurkhya and Fred J. Damerau,
eds., Handbook of Natural Language Processing
(Second ed.). Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton (2010): 627-66.
Liu, Bing. Sentiment
Analysis and Opinion Mining. 2012. in Synthesis
Lectures on Human Language Technologies (2012). 167 pages, (https://doi.org/10.2200/S00416ED1V01Y201204HLT016).
Loscos, Céline, Franco Tecchia,
Antonio Frisoli, Marcello Carrozzino, Hila Ritter Widenfeld, David Swapp,
Massimo Bergamasco. “The Museum of Pure Form: touching real statues in an
immersive virtual museum.” In Y. Chrysanthou, K. Cain, N. Silberman, F.
Niccolucci, Eds., The 5th International Symposium on Virtual Reality,
Archaeology and Cultural Heritage VAST 2004, (2004): 271-279.
MacNeil, Anne. 2015. Ad tempo taci. Songs for Isabella d’Este. http://ideamusic.web.unc.edu/ad-tempo-taci/

Masson, Terrence,
Daffy, and Ken Perlin. HOLO-DOODLE: an adaptation and
expansion of collaborative holojam virtual reality. SIGGRAPH '17.
ACM, New York (2017). Article 9, 2 pages. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3089269.3089270.
Pak, Alexander and Patrick
Paroubek. Twitter as a Corpus for Sentiment Analysis and
Opinion Mining. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2010, 17-23 May, Valletta, Malta (2010).

http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2010/index.html.
Perry, Sarah, Maria Economou,
Hilary Young, Maria Roussou, and Laia Pujol. Moving beyond
the Virtual Museum: Engaging Visitors Emotionally. In 23rd
International Conference on Virtual SystemMultimedia (VSMM)VSMM2017, IEEE
(2017).
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8346276/?reload=true.
Pietroni, Eva, and
Andrea Adami. Interacting with Virtual Reconstructions in
Museums: The Etruscanning Project.
Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage 7.2
(2014). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2611375 .
Pizzagalli, Daniela. La signora del Rinascimento. Vita e splendori di Isabella
d’Este alla corte di Mantova. Rizzoli, Milan (2001).
Ridel, Brett, Patrick Reuter,
Jeremy Laviole, Nicolas Mellado, Nadine Couture, and Xavier Granier. The Revealing Flashlight: Interactive Spatial Augmented
Reality for Detail Exploration of Cultural Heritage Artifacts.
Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage (JOCCH)
7.2. (2014). Special Issue on Interacting with the Past. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2611376.
Roussou, Maria. Virtual Heritage: from the Research Lab to the Broad Public. In
VAST 2000 Euroconference. Edited by Franco Niccolucci. BAR International Series
1075. Archaeopress, Oxford (2002): 93-100.
San Juan, Rose Marie. The Court Lady’s Dilemma: Isabella d’Este and Art Collecting
in the Renaissance.
Oxford Art Journal 14.1 (1991): 67-78.
Staus, Nancy L. and John H.
Falk. The Role of Emotion in Informal Science Learning:
Testing an Exploratory Model.
Mind, Brain, and Education 11 (2017): 45–53.
doi:10.1111/mbe.12139
Tiffin, John, and
Nobuyoshi Terashima. HyperReality: Paradigm for the Third
Millennium. Routledge, London and New York (2005).
Wardrip-Fruin, Noah.
Playable Media and Textual Instruments.
Dichtung Digital 1 (2005). http://www.dichtung-digital.de/2005/1/Wardrip-Fruin/index.htm
Witcomb, Andrea. 2015. Toward a Pedagogy of Feeling: Understanding How Museums Create
a Space for Cross-Cultural Encounters.
The International Handbooks of Museum Studies.
Hobocken, NJ: John WileySons, Hobocken, NJ (2015). DOI:
10.1002/9781118829059.wbihms116

