Data Assemblages: A Call to Conceptualize Materiality in the
                    Academic Ecosystem
Nabeel Siddiqui
25 August 2015

Introduction
Despite the prominence of the digital humanities, discussions surrounding the
assessment and nature of digital scholarship remain at the forefront of
un/conferences, workshops, and other academic gatherings. Although some prominent
organizations such as the Modern Language Association and American Historical
Association have begun to discuss how to evaluate digital scholarship, many digital
humanists continue to face backlash from peers, department chairs, and in many
cases, scholarly organizations (#mla2013)
(#denbo2014)
For tenure-track scholars, there is
often a sense that digital modes of representation may place you at a
relative disadvantage. Indeed, this may be outright advice from senior
faculty and administrators
(#svensson2010)
.
At the same time, we have seen a shift in the types of people engaged in the digital
humanities. While early practitioners largely came from traditional disciplines,
digital librarians, data curators, alt-acs, and independent researchers are now just
as likely to be seen at digital humanities conferences as tenured/tenure-track
professors. Calls to reform scholarship in the digital age, however, have continued
to privilege the research of traditional faculty over other practitioners, although
both often generate similar products. As collaboration between different members of
the academic ecosystem increases, I contend that it is imperative we create a new
theoretical framework that adequately acknowledges the parallels
between the work of conventional scholars and others, especially librarians and
curators. In this essay, I hope to begin this reconceptualization by accentuating
the shared materiality of both text-heavy digital humanities scholarship and more
curatorial work through the notion of data assemblages.

According to Kathleen Fitzpatrick, scholars
need to let go of some of our
fixation on the notion of originality in scholarly production, recognizing
that, in an environment in which more and more discourse is available, some
of the most important work that we can do as scholars may more closely
resemble contemporary editorial or curatorial practices
(#fitzpatrick2011)
. The focus on originality has limited digital humanities scholars, and the
work of some practitioners at the expense of others. As librarian Dorothea Salo
notes,
academia privileges its notion of
research to such a degree that it refuses to respect my praxis
(#salo2011)
. Similarly, in response to the failure of some faculty to recognize the work
of curators and librarians as equal, Trevor Munoz argues that we should frame data
curation as a form of publishing. According to Munoz,
Data curation as a
publishing activity is increasingly relevant to the
working lives of digital humanities scholars. Moreover, articulating
connections between publishing and data curation is
important in the context of strategic decisions libraries might make and, in
fact, are making about how to participate in
publishing
(#munoz2013)
. Overall, calls like Munoz’s and Salo’s highlight how the separation between
curation and conventional digital humanities scholarship has affected the ability of
both to push research forward.
As scholars move back and forth between conventional and
alternative academic positions, it becomes necessary to
examine the equivalences in labor for future job evaluations, promotional reviews,
and tenure requirements. A key reason why these evaluations sometimes downplay
curatorial work is because of an enduring perception of research as disembodied
practice. Jeanne Hamming and Helen Burgess make a similar contention in their
analysis of materialism in new media studies and scholarship . By drawing on the works of Bruno Latour, they highlight
that the detachment of the material from the intellectual is continuing evidence of
modernity’s inability to take hybrids and quasi-objects seriously. This ongoing debate about new media’s
functional (an in some cases even biological) difference from old media,
they claim,
contributes to a double erasure, for
scholars working in multimedia, of both their intellectual contributions and
their material labor
(#burgess2011)
. For Hamming and Burgess, it is important to examine the affordances and
restraints of materiality in intellectual research. Still, despite their
contentions, Hamming and Burgess maintain a rhetoric that continues to stress the
importance of traditional academic arguments. For instance, in
their discussion of Marcel O’Gorman’s Dreadmill, they
point out that he cites Nietzsche,
Kittler, Virilio, Haraway, Ernest Becker, among other scholars in order
to lend credence to his academic authority (#burgess2011).
Nonetheless, a significant portion of digital humanities scholarship does not
contain a conventional thesis-driven argument, and this discourse continues to
reject many non-traditional forms of academic labor.
The perceived immateriality of scholarship is even more insidiously damaging to the
digital humanities because it reestablishes the privileging of conventional analogue
scholarship above curatorial pursuits. In this essay, I seek to counter this by
positing the notion of data assemblages as a partial solution.
I begin by briefly surveying the changing nature of research in the era of big data
and the attempts by both curators and others to make sense of its impact on the
academy. Next, I provide an overview of Gilles Deleuze’s notion of assemblages as
outlined by new materialist scholar Manuel DeLanda. By expanding on this concept, I
detail the way that data assemblages allow us to more easily
observe the analogous labor of traditional scholars, digital humanists, and
curators. I define data assemblages as the resulting end product of curatorial and
digital humanities labor that consist of material parts that are contingent on their
contextual relations and always in flux. Following this, I use the Digital Public
Library of America as a case study for my notion of data assemblages. Finally, I
conclude by demonstrating how this reconceptualization moves beyond the merely
theoretical to understand the interdependency of individuals in the academic
ecosystem, and more broadly, permits us to reexamine the nature of materiality in
the digital era.

The Changing Nature of Scholarship in the Digital Era
The impact of widespread data on academic research has yet to be seen. Still,
numerous groups have contended that this research will impact not only
scientific but also humanities research. In this section, I briefly examine how
scholars and librarians have viewed the emergence of big data and highlight how,
despite numerous attempts, a comprehensive foundation remains unavailable that
takes seriously the materiality of digital humanities labor and its
contextual and fluctuating nature.
According to Chris Anderson of Wired Magazine, we
are now living in the Petabyte Age (#anderson2008). Anderson
polemically argues that this mass quantity of available data is especially
important for scholars because it requires us to reexamine our methodological
assumptions. According to him, we do not need to know why numbers allow us to
predict behavior. Instead,
the point is they do it, and we
can track and measure it with unprecedented fidelity. With enough data,
the numbers speak for themselves
(#anderson2008)
. The sciences have led the charge in reevaluating their epistemological
assumptions in light of big data. Early attempts at examining data in context
emerged in informatics, but a more extensive movement arose in the 2000s known
as E-science. E-science provided a lens to deal with the massive influx of data
and the increased necessity of collaborative scholarship. According to one group
of early practitioners, E-science
enables a new order of
collaborative, more inter-disciplinary research, based on shared
research expertise, instruments and computing resources, and, crucially,
increasing access to collections of primary research data and
information
(#lord2004)
. Major scientific research now exists within this E-science paradigm. One
example is the Sloan Digital Sky Survey that has resulted in an opening up of
scholarship and a reassessment of the role of mass computational methods in
astronomical research. The team that led the project regarded it as the
beginning of a fourth paradigm
in scientific research (#gray2002). Similarly, large computational
methods have begun to dominate the fields of bioengineering and physics.
Data curation, a growing faction in library and information science, takes
seriously the claims of these scientific big data movements and seeks to address
the data deluge more thoroughly. The movement’s most direct
precedent is in the notion of digital curation. Digital curation, according to
Elizabeth Yakel, is
the active involvement of
information professionals in the management, including the preservation,
of digital data for future use
(#yakel2007)
. As Allen Renear and Trevor Munoz note, however, digital curation fails
to engage with the research needs of scholars. In contrast, they seek to reframe
digital curation as data curation. For them,
data curation addresses the
challenge of maintaining digital information that is produced in the
course of research in a manner that preserves its meaning
and [emphasis mine] usefulness as a potential input for
further research
(#munoz2013)
. By taking the needs of researchers as critical to their own praxis, data
curators make apparent the need for scholars to find a way to recognize one
another’s work through a shared lens.
More broadly, library science has also taken up the question of context in the
gathering of resources through the concept of collections.
Collections are important for research and scholarship because they recognize
that
the totality of the records provides
information that no individual record can
(#duff2002)
. In other words, they represent the need of understanding how material
develops in a context. Still, the perceived materiality of collections
problematizes them as a framework for digital libraries. For instance, Hur-Li
Lee highlights,
The long history of the library being
associated with a physical building may have … made imagining virtual
collections difficult
(#lee2005)
.
Others have pushed to understand the relations between different materials
through the notion of contextual mass. Contextual mass is a
principle that places an
emphasis on collecting materials
that work together as a system of sources, with meaningful
interrelationships between different types of materials and subjects, to
support research inquiry
(#palmer2010)
. Collections based on the principle of contextual
mass can be of any size as long as their contextual relations
remain. The main problem with contextual mass, however, is that it perpetuates
an image of a non-fluctuating collection that serves as a singular totality. As
a result, the focus is on the materiality of the collection itself rather than
the larger fluctuating infrastructural needs of research.
Despite changes in the library and science communities, humanities scholars, as a
whole, have been less likely to view themselves as requiring large-scale
infrastructure or needing to examine data contextually. One reason for this is
because of the nature of data that humanities scholars find important. Christine
Borgman notes,
the humanities and arts are the
least likely of the disciplines to generate their own data in the forms
of observations, models, or experiments
(#borgman2009)
. Humanities scholars are more likely to rely on data created by others —
i.e. diaries, literature, and films — than their own. Yet, this may be changing.
For instance, large-scale projects in corpus linguistics have gained traction in
the digital humanities community. Organizations, such as the HathiTrust, and
projects, such as Google Books, now require humanities scholars to seriously
examine the infrastructure encompassing their data. Furthermore, national and
international funding agencies are now taking data seriously before financing
humanities projects. The National Endowment of the Humanities, for instance, has
begun to require Data Management Plans in order to secure grant funding . The often-ambiguous guidelines and regulations of these
plans demonstrate the embryonic nature of assessing digital materials. Yet, with
a large organization such as the NEH leading the charge, other granting agencies
will follow suit, and there will be an increased requirement for digital
humanities scholars to reassess how they share and store their data. Still, most
humanities scholars, outside of the digital humanities, are not trained in
computational methods, and the nature of humanities research often discourages
collaborative efforts that may yield new insights.
All this is not to say, however, that humanities scholars have completely
neglected to examine changing infrastructural needs in the digital age. Digital
history pioneers Dan Cohen and Roy Rosenzsweig noted the difficulty of
large-scale information preservation (#cohen2006).
Later, Rosenzsweig argued that the problem of digital infrastructure was no
longer the question of scarcity but of abundance. He feared that the massive
amount of information on the Internet would be too large to preserve and a large
record of cultural production would be lost. Rosenzsweig implored historians to
think
simultaneously about how to
research, write, and teach in a world of unheard of historical abundance
and how to avoid a future of record scarcity
(#rosenzweig2003)
. In other words, because of the mass of information that was created on
the web there were fundamental issues involved in assessing what exactly we
should archive.
Along with grappling with how to save digital data, humanities scholars have also
sought to create new degree programs that address the need for graduate training
in digital methods. Regarding an attempt to form a Master's Degree in Digital
Humanities at the University of Virginia, John Unsworth noted that the catalyst
for the degree was based on:
The simple observation that our
culture and our cultural heritage are migrating very rapidly to digital
forms, and in order to manage that migration and take advantage of the
new intellectual and creative possibilities it offers, we will need
trained professionals who understand both the humanities and information
technology, and we will need them in a number of different areas — in
museums, libraries, teaching, scholarship, publishing, government,
communications, entertainment, and elsewhere
(#unsworth2001)
.
Despite these outliers, however, few humanities practitioners are deeply engaged
with the digital humanities. According to Shelia Anderson and Tobias Blanke,
Except for a small minority the
humanities do not have a tradition of dealing with machine algorithms,
with the graphs produced from statistical analysis, and the maps, trees
and other forms of visual representation that arise from big data
analysis
(#anderson2012)
. As a result, humanities scholars, for the time being, will likely
continue to rely on curators and information science professionals trained in
handling large data structures, and a theoretical structure that acknowledges
the often-equal input of all camps is imperative.
Data Assemblages
Christine Borgman contends that one of the fundamental questions that digital
humanities needs to answer is that of
what are data?
(#borgman2009)
. For many, data exists in the immaterial space of the digital. The notion
of cyberspace as immaterial is a common one in science fiction, and popular
movies, such as The Matrix, perpetuate an image of
the computer realm as something dream-like (#wachowski1999). This
association of cyberspace with the immaterial comes from pioneers of modern
science fiction, such as William Gibson. According to Gibson's definition of
cyberspace in Neuromancer, cyberspace is an
illusory and hallucinogenic condition:
Cyberspace. A consensual
hallucination experienced daily by billions of legitimate operators, in
every nation, by children being taught mathematical concepts... A
graphic representation of data abstracted from the banks of every
computer in the human system. Unthinkable complexity. Lines of light
ranged in the nonspace of the mind, clusters and constellations of data.
Like city lights, receding
(#gibson1984)
.
Of course, data is material. For example, although new computational
developments such as cloud computing harken to an ephemeral and illusory
cyberspace, they still make use of large-scale materiality through server farms.
As Jean-François Blanchette notes,
computing systems are suffused
through and through with the constraints of their materiality
(#blanchette2011)
. In addition, Ian Bogost and Nick Montfort demonstrate that it is crucial
we take the materiality of computation seriously in our examinations of digital
culture (#bogost2009). Asserting data’s materiality, however, is
not enough. A more comprehensive framework is needed, and the digital humanities
has yet to provide a widely adopted ontological basis for research projects that
deviate from orthodox textual scholarship. Due to the nature of digital culture,
it is important that this ontological framework earnestly examine not only the
fluctuation of data but also the changing relationship between different forms
of data. As Joris van Zundert notes,
transformed by digital
technology, text and digital editions – digital humanities data in
general, as a matter of fact– become fluid, living,
reaching a state wherein they are perpetually in a digital information
lifecycle
(#vanzundert2012)
. In order to provide a more comprehensive framework for digital projects
and to highlight the relationship between curation and conventional scholarship,
I examine Manuel DeLanda's expansion on Gilles Deleuze's notion of assemblages in his New Philosophy of Society as a partial solution.
The concept of assemblages may be unfamiliar to many — although it is gaining
some academic interest — and a key reason for this is that the literature on it
is nebulous and scattered throughout Deleuze’s work. DeLanda reformulates
Deleuzian assemblages into a comprehensive framework and seeks to broadly
examine social institutions through a realist perspective. However, instead of
viewing his framework as only relevant to social institutions, I adapt it as a
broader way to view digital humanities data and scholarship. Specifically,
through the notion of assemblages, I seek to conceptualize curatorial work and
digital humanities praxis as resulting in data assemblages.
While curation has made a case for the reexamination of data management
techniques, it has often continued the rhetoric that poses a fundamental
dichotomy between research and curatorial activities. Curation, in this sense,
becomes a service that operates as the back-end of digital humanities work but
is not an equal part of it. Data assemblages, on the other hand, provide one way
to help curators and digital humanities scholars move forward while
acknowledging their reliance on one another. By reframing the notion of
projects, collections, and research as data assemblages, we can see the dynamic
relationship between various groups and productions in the digital humanities.
Assemblages in their most basic definition are material component parts that
form wholes. These wholes are notable in that they resist totalities and are
made up of assemblages themselves. DeLanda asks us to remove the Hegelian focus
on relations of interiority because the autonomy of component parts is
questionable in a framework that defines their very characteristics based on
their relative relationships. Instead, assemblages focus on relations of
exteriority. These relations of exteriority are not exhaustive of the
ontological properties of a component part. For instance, if an arm becomes
removed from a body in a relationship of interiority it fails to be an arm. In
contrast, in relationships of exteriority, the arm has the potential to maintain
some aspects of itself as it becomes part of a new system of relations . As a result, component parts become
fluctuating in assemblages, or as DeLanda states,
a component part of an assemblage
may be detached from it and plugged into a different assemblage in which
its interactions are different
(#delanda2006)
. Component parts, notably, also remain in flux and are made up of
different assemblages themselves.
In a data assemblage, the same focus on materiality allows us to reorganize our
thinking of bits and their role in research. As noted earlier, data are
material, and their material existence is not contingent on their relationships
in curatorial practice. This moves away from earlier notions such as
collections and contextual mass
where the relationship between components is so strong that their
characteristics within a new framework are problematic. Notably, while data
curation allows us to gather bits in an assemblage that can then be used for
further research, it perpetuates the perception that curation is done for
research purposes rather than something analogous. In data assemblages, this is
altered, as the relationships of interiority are no longer characteristic of the
material but rather by relationships of exteriority. This allows us to maintain
a focus on contextual relationships while still resisting totalities, and also
allows us as researchers to focus on some aspects of data, even those assembled
by data curators. Scholars can reconfigure this data for their own personal
research, and the component’s relation of exteriority changes from one data
assemblage (explicitly that of the libraries) to the data assemblage of the
researcher (namely the project). Because the results of these data assemblages
are not dichotomous but mutually reinforcing, they allow us to more clearly see
the link between curatorial and text-heavy work.
Assemblage theory is not only notable for stressing the material characteristics
of data, but also because it provides an additional framework for the
examination of these material parts. Through a framework of three separate
dimensions that correspond with three axes, assemblages become more than just a
focus on the need to assess fluctuation in ontology. Each axis allows us to
investigate the link between digital materials and their corresponding data
assemblages. I go through each axis individually using the example of a
literature review. While some may contend that literature reviews are only used
in conjunction with larger scholarly pieces, this is not always true. Perhaps,
most prominently, scholars often publish literature reviews in journals as
articles overviewing the state of disciplinary fields, and graduate students
sometimes submit them separately before embarking on the dissertation and
thesis. Nonetheless, the general framework should be applicable to other forms
of print scholarship. While such an exercise may seem tedious, I believe it will
more lucidly describe the link between analogue and digital modes of
scholarship. In addition, I also emphasize what each axis means in the spectrum
of data curation and digital humanities praxis.
The first dimension of data assemblages focuses on the material and expressive
roles of components (#delanda2006). The material role of
assemblage parts correspond to their physical existence within an ecosystem, and
in the case of the literature review, these are the actual books and articles.
Often, scholars creating literature reviews will make copies of relevant pages
and cut them up into different sections. They then place the different pieces
thematically to create sections of an outline. The materiality of conventional
research becomes more apparent through this process. In data assemblages, the
material roles of component parts exist on one end of an axis with the
expressive role on the opposite end. These are the actual characteristics of the
books and articles, such as their color and form. These expressive roles should
not be understood as inherent characteristics of a component part but rather as
also contingent and in flux.
The most obvious analogy of material and expressive component parts in current
digital media scholarship is within the framework of Matthew Kirshenbaum’s data
forensics. For Kirschenbaum, like DeLanda, focusing solely on the material
structure is problematic. He posits that the material can be further broken down
into forensic and formal materiality (#kirschenbaum2012). Forensic
materiality focuses on individualization and the reduction of physical matter
(#kirschenbaum2012). Formal materiality, on the other
hand, are the imposition of
multiple-relational computational states on a data set or digital
object
(#kirschenbaum2012). For Kirschenbaum, formal materiality
can be understood as the
relative or just-in-time
dimension of materiality, one where any material particulars are
arbitrary and independent of the underlying computational environment
and are instead solely the function of the imposition of a specific
formal regimen on a given set of data and the resulting contrast to any
other available alternative regimens
(#kirschenbaum2012)
. It provides the illusion of immateriality in the material.
Because Kirschenbaum seeks to maintain the ontological distinctiveness of
material objects through their reductive individualized traces, he is often
ambiguous on the distinction between formal materiality and forensic materiality
in things such as firmware. He implores us to not draw an analogy between the
formal and forensic and hardware and software, since this hardline distinction
is itself a result of industrial practices by companies such as IBM . Data assemblages remove this
ambiguity by not only making the fluidity of the forensic a critical aspect of
the material but also by leaving open the possibility of the heterogeneous
nature of expressive and material forms. In data assemblages, the material role
is exemplified by the electrical impulses in data. The expressive role
represents the forms that these electrical impulses take. These roles and
materials are constantly shifting allowing for a more formal structure to
understand heterogeneous entities such as firmware. As DeLanda notes
these roles are material and may
occur in mixtures, that is, a given component may play a mixture of
material and expressive roles by conveying different sets of
capacities
(#delanda2006)
.
The second axis deals with the territorial and deterritorial roles of
assemblages (#delanda2006). DeLanda cautions us
against viewing assemblages as totalities but instead as continuously
fluctuating collections of material. Territorialization is the process of
component parts of an assemblage coming together. These can be
accidental and evolutionary in nature or purposeful
curatorial acts. Deterittorialization, on the other hand, represents the
opposite process of breaking apart assemblages. Again, these parts do not lose
their autonomy because their characteristics are not contingent on their
relationships of interiority. In the example of the literature review, the
reviewer exemplifies the territorializing aspect of the assemblage by placing
corresponding works in distinctive sections of the literature review. He or she
can also remove parts from different sections, and this exemplifies
deterittorialization. Normally, things that we have traditionally seen as having
agency, such as sentient beings, deterritorialize
assemblages, but non-sentient beings can also engage in the process. In this
sense, data assemblages take seriously the role of quasi-objects and the need to
reexamine what Latour refers to as the modernist constitution, which views
nature and society as unattached (#latour1993). For
instance, a fire can erupt in the location where the reviewer is conducting his
research and cause the work to become ash. In either case, the
deterittorialization of the assemblages requires reexamining the relationship
between various component parts.
In data assemblages, the territorialization and deterittorialization of
component parts are a result of the labor of digital humanities scholars and
curators. For instance, as curators organize and collect these assemblages, they
create new data assemblages made up of material components. Databases, in this
sense, are digital materials that create larger digital infrastructure. Similar
to how a scholar creates a literature review, digital humanities projects
reconfigure electrical material into assemblages. Projects as diverse as digital
historical maps and text mining initiatives are all, in this sense,
analogous.
The third and final dimension of assemblages corresponds to a coding/decoding
axis (#delanda2006). In many ways, this dimension
should not be considered separate from the territorialization and
deterittorialization dimension but as intertwined. Linguistic and genetic
phenomena can be seen as part of this dimension. These are special cases that
often provide the illusion of the immaterial and work at multiple scales of
assemblages. Still, they contain a material functionality. Case in point, DNA
represents a physical chromosome structure while language represents
neurological phenomenon. These help in territorializing assemblages by giving
them distinct linguistic structures. According to DeLanda, language often causes
us to lose site of relationships because of the
linguisticality of experience,
that is, the idea than an otherwise undifferentiated phenomenological
field is cut up into discrete entities by the meanings of the general
term
(#delanda2006)
. In a literature review, such a form of coding exists in the linguistic
assertion of the arrangement itself, and the act of a scholar declaring the
literature review as complete and ready for submission. A coding function also
manifests itself in regards to the transitions and thesis of the literature
review itself and highlights the way that coding can affect assemblages in
diverse scalarity.
In data assemblages, the coding/decoding dimension is exemplified by the
assertion of collections as singular totalities and metadata. Research projects
and curatorial collections of data are not ontologically separate from one
another but become distinct through this linguistic maneuvering. Due to the
algorithmic coding of computer software, a territorialization of bits exists
that move through the material structure of the computer processing unit. For
librarianship, a more pertinent example is metadata that provides the
ontological significance of material along with an examination of the
connections between these materials.
Together, the three dimensions of data assemblages provide an additional
framework for the discussion surrounding data curation and digital humanities.
It also permits us to examine the various aspects of digital materiality and see
their relationship between one another without confining them to relationships
of interiority. I believe that such a framework makes it easier to create
collaborative opportunities between different groups in the digital humanities
because it posits the emergence of data assemblages as the resulting outcome of
both research and curatorial labor.
Case Study: The Digital Public Library of America
In order to provide an overview of how this framework works with an actual
project, I use the Digital Public Library of America (DPLA) as a case study for
data assemblages. The organization began in 2010 with forty leaders and sought
to make
an open, distributed network of
comprehensive online resources that would draw on the nation’s living
heritage from libraries, universities, archives, and museums in order to
educate, inform, and empower everyone in current and future
generations
(#dpla)
. Through the support of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the Berkman
Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University, the DPLA launched after
nearly two years of planning in April 2013. Although it calls itself a library,
it does not circulate any non-digital materials and at this time, does not
create new conventional content itself. Instead, it curates the digital metadata
of other libraries and cultural heritage organizations and puts them in one
place for easy access. Through this aggregating approach, the DPLA has been able
to create partnerships with the HathiTrust, the Smithsonian Institute, the
Internet Archive, and the Library of Congress. Still, despite its success,
measuring the academic impact of the DPLA as a scholarly project remains
difficult because the link between curatorship and scholarship is unclear. By
reassessing the DPLA as a data assemblage, I seek to demonstrate that the DPLA’s
efforts are ontologically analogous to other scholarly activities, such as a
literature review.
The DPLA is an important case study for the scholarly use of data assemblages
for three important reasons. First, created by a largely academic organization
housed at Harvard University, it requires constant funding and infrastructural
requirements from scholarly resources, and these often cut into and compete from
funding for more orthodox academic research. By examining the DPLA’s
relationship to routine scholarship, we can better make sense of the pitfalls
and benefits of sharing and competing for the same resources. Second, created by
both academics and other leaders, the DPLA makes apparent the collaborative and
similar nature of traditional scholarship and curatorship. This convergence of
roles is important not only for collaboration but for future tenure reviews and
job evaluations as individuals move more fluidly between academia and
infrastructure customarily seen as supporting it. For instance, Dan Cohen, the
current Executive Director of the DPLA, gave up his professorship at George
Mason University to head the organization. For Cohen, his movement to the DPLA
advanced the work he already did in academia at the Roy Rosenzweig Center for
History and New Media (#cohen2013). Yet, in the current academic
climate his work at the DPLA, would not count towards a tenure review. Finally,
the DPLA is an important analysis of data assemblages because it outlines many
of the same elements in its philosophy, three main elements, and mission.
The collective nature of the components that the DPLA aggregates exemplifies the
material and expressive components of the first axis of data assemblages. The
DPLA’s Philosophy page illustrates the importance
of materiality for the organization:
To help organize and structure
metadata, the DPLA falls back on some pretty philosophical concepts.
Perhaps the most important of these is the idea that things in the
physical world can be represented at a number of different
levels
(#dplac)
. While the DPLA turns each item into metadata that it aggregates, this
accumulation also results in the material bits of these items to become
flattened ontologically as they move through the DPLA’s servers. The expressive
component of the first axis deals with the forms of these bits, and by
manipulating the arrangement of electricity, the DPLA is able to create an
aggregation of metadata that it allows others to handle.
The territorialization and deterittorialization of material bits is, in many
ways, the core of the DPLA’s mission. On it’s About
page, the organization lists three
main elements that outline the nature of the DPLA. The first of
these focuses on how the DPLA seeks to be
a portal [emphasis in
original] that delivers students, teachers, scholars, and the public to
incredible resources, wherever they may be in America
(#dpla)
. In the parlance of data assemblages, this portal is a result of the
territorializaiton of material bits in different libraries and cultural heritage
organizations. The second main element of the DPLA demonstrates its role in
deterritorializing these material bits. According to the organization, the DPLA
seeks to be
A platform [emphasis in
original] that enables new and transformative uses of our digitized
cultural heritage
(#dpla)
. The organization hopes to accomplish this using Application Programming
Interfaces (APIs) that permit others to manipulate the its own data. For
instance, Serendip-o-matic, an application built in
a single week for the One Week | One Tool project at the Roy Rosenzweig Center
for History and New Media, allows scholars to search for relevant sources in the
DPLA using any text they may have (#serendip2013). By doing so,
the application lets them deterritorialize material bits on its servers and
manipulate them to make curatorship easier and more integral to scholarly
research. The importance of examining relations of exteriority also becomes more
evident. As Catherine Adams and Terrie Lynn Thompson highlight,
Within a sociomaterial reading,
data is not really a thing but rather a relational effect: it is what it
is in a particular moment because of the temporal and spatial networks
of relations in which it is ensnared
(#adams2014)
. As these bits move through various networks, coding and decoding
perpetuate the perception of these bits as frozen totalities.
The third axis of coding/decoding corresponds to the process of declaring
discrete material entities as unified wholes. The DPLA’s main website
exemplifies this by fashioning bits in curatorial form as virtual timelines,
maps, and exhibits. As mentioned earlier, we should not view the coding and
decoding aspects as necessarily different from the territorializing and
deterritorializing aspects as both highlight our ability to see things as
distinct or compiled. Furthermore, along with manipulating the coding and
decoding of its own resources, the DPLA also makes a concentrated effort to
understand the linguistic and rhetorical moves that work for and against it as a
library. Case in point, in its final main
element, the DPLA seeks to be
an advocate for a strong public
option [emphasis in original] in the twenty-first
century
(#dpla)
. Specifically, it hopes to create a way for people to have access to
different sources of knowledge, and it presents itself in a longer line of
public libraries in America. This rhetorical move flattens the dissimilarity
between digital libraries from more traditional ones.
Still, despite its success, the DPLA continues to face numerous challenges. While
the academic community is supportive of the organization’s mission, it continues
to view the activities as secondary to scholarly research. The lack of a
scholarly thesis or traditional format also means that the labor of those in the
DPLA may seem less valuable in future tenure reviews or job applications. As a
curatorial activity in the library community, the DPLA has a better record in
gaining support, although criticisms were prominent before launch . As one group of curators notes,
Digital aggregations can provide
essential metastructures for unifying distributed content…. however, the
act of bringing together and providing access to a large number of
collections does not guarantee that the resulting aggregation will be a
useful resource for researchers
(#palmer2010)
. By reexamining the materiality of both scholarly and curatorial
activities as data assemblages, the work of both becomes more fluid and the link
between the two becomes more apparent and continuous.
Implications for Future Research and Collaborations
According to Sayeed Choudhury, Mike Furlough, and Joyce Ray:
We have on the one hand, a
community, or a subset of several communities, that has been working on
the back end of digital production from the
generation of raw data to the construction of an organized product that
can be accessed, and, on the other hand, another community — publishers
— who work on the front end of scholarly
communications, from manuscripts to publication
(#choudhury2012)
.
Data assemblages provide a structure for future digital humanities research that
collapses this dichotomous vision of back-end and front-end digital production.
While scholars of the humanities have increasingly pushed for interdisciplinary
research, the resulting methodologies have continued to stress endeavors
traditionally considered “academic.” This has forced curators and librarians to
continuously reassess the work they do with a focus on orthodox researchers.
This same attention on research needs, however, has resulted in a glancing over
of the importance of curatorial activities as something valuable in and of
themselves. Data assemblages, as a result, have broad implications for curators,
digital humanists, and the broader digital age beyond the mere theoretical.
For curators, the notion of data assemblages allows us a way to view curation as
an activity in and of itself. Tenure, in traditional academic settings, has
relied on the dissemination of scholarly information, usually in the form of
published articles. While such scholarly publications are important, they
perpetuate, at least in the humanities, an ideal of the lone scholar working
outside of any broader non-academic infrastructure. Curators in this context
fail to be given due credit for their work despite being in the academic
ecosystem and often must rely on the occasional acknowledgement within a
scholarly monograph for appreciation of their labor. In many ways, this
problematizes not only the way that conventional scholars view research but also
the ways curators see their work. As Trevor Munoz and Julia Flanders write,
data curation is…both a
scholarly research area and a praxis and, increasingly, data curation
too uses a distinct methodology to advance itself as both a discipline
and a profession
(#flanders2011)
. These curatorial activities will be critical to researchers, especially
since groups like the data curation community take the link between their work
and other researchers to be central to their praxis. The data assemblage model
pushes this further by asking us to question the distinction between research
and curatorial activities altogether. Because all data assemblages exist on an
ontologically flat surface, these activities should not be differentiated from —
or at least not seen as antithetical to — scholarly publication.
For digital humanists, the data assemblage model, along with causing us to
question the nature of scholarly publishing, allow us to create new forms of
scholarly activities that are not oriented around traditional narrative
structures: maps, games, databases, etc. In other words, the larger digital
ecosystem causes us to reexamine our scholarly publishing and the role of
diverse media formats in the academy. By viewing scholarly activity as something
that must be in the form of print, we perpetuate the notion that narrative
structures are the only meaningful forms of communication. Unfortunately, the
coding ability of narrative is hard to get away from, and digital scholars
should be wary of viewing their activity as separate from data curation and vice
versa due to these narrative characteristics. Of course, the value of
scholarship is not strictly in the format it takes but also in its ability to
stay in conversation with other scholars. Curatorial activities, however, also
do this when they seek collaboration with other curators. While these activities
are not stated explicitly as scholarly dialogue, we should be wary to discount
them as existing in a structural vacuum.
More broadly, the notion of data assemblages allows us to reconsider our place in
the digital ecosystem. According to Matthew Kirshenbaum, we must confront the
.txtual condition. As he shows,
the preservation of digital
objects is logically inseparable from the act of their
creation — the lag between creation and preservation collapses
completely, since a digital object may only ever be said to be
preserved if it is accessible, and each individual
access creates the object anew
(#kirschenbaum2013)
. In other words, a deep examination of digital material shows that access
and duplication are inherent to the digital world, and there is no separation of
access from creation. We can never really touch the same file because the
postmodern nature of computers means files are continuously located in new
memory, which are fluctuating electrical pulses. Such electrical impulses are
themselves part of a slow evolution into the computer that begins with parts
assembled throughout the world. Kirshenbaum argues that the
fingerprint of the files that we touch in the .txtual
condition causes them to change. Of course, the same fingerprints apply to the
real world, as criminal forensics has made clear. We see that the assemblage of
objects such as books changes along with the data itself, as it is stored in and
out of the correlating neurological memory of the observer. In data assemblages,
no claims to ontological totalities are made. As a result, the .txtual condition
vanishes, or at least becomes temporarily manageable.
Furthermore, data assemblages expand on our understanding of ourselves in the
digital environment and as researchers. New media scholar Lesley Gourlay argues,
The academy has become saturated
by technologies to the point that there can be no meaningful distinction
made between digital and analogue, embodied and virtual,
face-to-face and
online
(#gourlay2011)
. In their examination of digital materialities and posthumanism,
Catherine Adams and Terrie Lynn Thompson discuss the need for four
posthuman fluencies
(#adams2014). The first and second of these fluencies deals with
our ability to understand our shared agency with digital technology and the way
that these digital technologies lead to a de-skilling and up-skilling of
research activity. Data assemblages make this shared agency more apparent since
the ability to territorialize and deterritorialize not only deals with sentient
agency, such as humans, but also, as in Latourian actor-network-theory, the
agency of non-sentient actors such as computers, cameras, and servers. The third
of these posthuman agencies deal with the ability for data to become frozen in
time for research and the importance of flux for data assemblages. When data is viewed as frozen
but [emphasis in original] lively and mobile, write
Adams and Thompson,
new enactments and understandings
of data are possible
(#adams2014)
. The final of these agencies concerns the importance of understanding the
tensions and affordances that come with increased collaboration and
fragmentation of research practices. By viewing curatorial and digital
humanities scholarship as data assemblages, these posthuman fluencies become
more apparent and allow us as scholars to grapple with new questions about our
research praxis in the digital age.
As digital humanities increases as a field, the need to examine our
methodological assumptions will be more apparent. The field has defined itself
as a revolutionary force in the academy, and this same revolutionary impulse
provides scholars a leg up in collaborative techniques that bridge curatorship
with more conventional digital humanities scholarship. As Kathleen Fitzpatrick
notes,
the key problems that we face
again and again are social rather than technological in nature: problems
of encouraging participation in collaborative and collective projects,
of developing sound preservation and sustainability practices, of
inciting institutional change, of promoting new ways of thinking about
how academic work might be done in the coming years
(#fitzpatrick2010)
. This piece sought to outline one way to increase collaboration and
acknowledgement by recognizing the material ecosystem surrounding digital
scholarship. Still, it is not perfect, and I hope that others will carry out
further research and to make the link between the curation and conventional
scholarship even more clear.


Adams, C.Thompson,
T.L., 2014. Interviewing the Digital Materialities of Posthuman Inquiry:
Decoding the encoding of research practices. In Proceedings
of the 9th International Conference on Networked Learning. Ninth
International Conference on Networked learning. Edinburgh. Available at: http://www.networkedlearningconference.org.uk/abstracts/pdf/adams.pdf.
Anderson, C., 2008. The End of
Theory. Wired Magazine, 16. Available at: http://www.simulex.it/Materiali/Articoli/Chris%20Anderson-The%20end%20of%20theory.doc
[Accessed July 2, 2013].
Anderson, S.Blanke, T.,
2012. Taking the long view: from e-science humanities to humanities digital
ecosystems. Historical Social Research/Historische
Sozialforschung, pp.147–164.
Blanchette, J.-F., 2011. A
Material History of Bits. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 62(6), pp.1042–1057.
Bogost, I.
Montfort, N., 2009. Platform Studies: Frequently Questioned Answers. In Digital
Arts and Culture 2009. UC Irvine. Available at: http://escholarship.org/uc/item/01r0k9br [Accessed July 12,
2013].
Borgman, C.L., 2009. The Digital
Future is Now: A call to Action for the Humanities. Digital
humanities quarterly, 3(4). Available at: http://works.bepress.com/borgman/233/ [Accessed July 2, 2013].
Burgess, H.J.Hamming, J.,
2011. New Media in the Academy: Labor and the Production of Knowledge in
Scholarly Multimedia. , 5(3). Available at: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/5/3/000102/000102.html
[Accessed August 18, 2014].
Choudhury,
S., Furlough, M.Ray, J., 2012. Digital Curation and E-Publishing:
Libraries Make the Connection. In Against the Grain Press, pp. 476–483.
Available at: http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/charleston/2009/OutofBox/2/ [Accessed July
11, 2013].
Cohen, D., 2013. The Digital Public
Library of America, Me, and You. Dan Cohen.
Available at: http://www.dancohen.org/2013/03/05/the-digital-public-library-of-america-me-and-you/
[Accessed September 15, 2014].
Cohen, D.J.
Rosenzweig, R., 2006. Digital History: A Guide to
Gathering, Preserving, and Presenting the Past on the Web,
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
DeLanda, M., 2006. A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social
Complexity, London; New York: Continuum.
Denbo, S., 2014. Committee on
Professional Evaluation of Digital Scholarship by Historians. American Historical Association. Available at: http://blog.historians.org/2014/01/committee-professional-evaluation-digital-scholarship-historians/
[Accessed September 15, 2014].
Digital Public Library of America, About
DPLA. Available at: http://dp.la/info/
[Accessed September 15, 2014a].
Digital Public Library of America,
History-DPLA. Available at: http://dp.la/info/about/history/ [Accessed September 15,
2014b].
Digital Public Library of America,
Philosophy-DPLA. Available at: http://dp.la/info/developers/codex/policies/philosophy/ [Accessed
September 15, 2014c].
Duff, W.M.Johnson,
C.A., 2002. Accidentally Found on Purpose: Information-Seeking Behavior of
Historians in Archives. The Library Quarterly,
72(4), pp.472–496.
Enis, M., 2013. DPLA Launches, Librarians
Respond. The Digital Shift. Available at: http://www.thedigitalshift.com/2013/04/digital-libraries/librarians-respond-to-dpla-launch/
[Accessed September 15, 2014].
Fitzpatrick, K., 2011.
Planned Obsolescence: Publishing, Technology, and the
Future of the Academy, New York: New York University Press.
Fitzpatrick, K., 2010.
Reporting from the Digital Humanities 2010 Conference. The
Chronicle of Higher Education Blogs: ProfHacker. Available at: http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/reporting-from-the-digital-humanities-2010-conference/25473
[Accessed September 15, 2014].
Flanders, J.
Muñoz, T., 2011. An Introduction to Humanities Data Curation. Available at: http://guide.dhcuration.org/intro/ [Accessed July 2, 2013].
Gibson, W., 1984. Neuromancer, New York: Ace Books.
Gourlay, L., 2011. Cyborg Literacies
and the Posthuman Text. In Workshop on New Media, New
Literacies, and New Forms of Learning, December. London, UK. http://blogs.ubc.ca/newliteracies/files/2011/12/Gourlay.pdf.
Gray, J. et al., 2002. Online
Scientific Data Curation, Publication, and Archiving. In Astronomical Telescopes and Instrumentation. pp. 103–107. Available
at: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/proceeding.aspx?articleid=874929
[Accessed July 12, 2013].
Kirschenbaum, M., 2013.
The .txtual Condition: Digital Humanities, Born-Digital Archives, and the Future
Literary. Digital Humanities Quarterly, 7(1).
Available at: http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/1/000151/000151.html.
Kirschenbaum, M.G., 2012.
Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic
Imagination, Cambridge, Mass.; London: MIT Press.
Latour, B., 1993. We Have Never Been Modern, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Lee, H.-L., 2005. The Concept of Collection
from the User’s Perspective. The Library, 75(1).
Available at: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/428693 [Accessed July 2,
2013].
Lord, P. et al., 2004. From Data Deluge to
Data Curation. In Proceedings of the UK E-science All Hands
Meeting 2004. pp. 371–375. Available at: http://www.allhands.org.uk/2004/proceedings/papers/150.pdf [Accessed
July 2, 2013].
Modern Language
Association, 2013. Guidelines for Evaluating Work in Digital Humanities and
Digital Media. Modern Language Association.
Available at: http://www.mla.org/guidelines_evaluation_digital [Accessed September
15, 2014].
Munoz, T., 2013. Data Curation as
Publishing for Digital Humanists. In CIC Center for Library Initiatives Annual
Conference. Columbus, OH. Available at: http://trevormunoz.com/notebook/2013/05/30/data-curation-as-publishing-for-dh.html.
Munoz, T.Renear, A.,
2013. Issues in Humanities Data Curation. Available at: http://cirssweb.lis.illinois.edu/paloalto/whitepaper/premeeting/
[Accessed July 2, 2013].
National Endowment
for the Humanities, Digital Humanities Start-Up Grants. National Endowment for the Humanities. Available at: http://www.neh.gov/grants/odh/digital-humanities-start-grants
[Accessed July 12, 2013].
Palmer, C.L.,
Zavalina, O.L.Fenlon, K., 2010. Beyond Size and Search: Building
Contextual Mass in Digital Aggregations for Scholarly Use. Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 47(1), pp.1–10.
Rosenzweig, R., 2003. Scarcity
or Abundance? Preserving the Past in a Digital Era. The
American Historical Review, 108(3), pp.735–762.
Salo, D., 2011. Respect My Praxis. #alt-academy: Alternative Academic Careers. Available
at: http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/alt-ac/pieces/respect-my-praxis
[Accessed July 11, 2013].
Serendip-o-matic
Team, 2013. Serendip-o-matic: Let Your Sources Surprise You. Serendip-o-matic. Available at: http://serendipomatic.org/
[Accessed September 15, 2014].
Svensson, P., 2010. The Landscape
of Digital Humanities. Digital Humanities
Quarterly, 004(1).
Unsworth, J., 2001. A Master’s
Degree in Digital Humanities: Part of the Media Studies Program At The
University of Virginia. In Congress of the Social Sciences and Humanities 2001.
Québec, Canada.
Wachowski, A.Wachowski,
L., 1999. The Matrix,
Yakel, E., 2007. Digital Curation.
OCLC SystemsServices, 23(4),
pp.335–340.
Van Zundert, J., 2012. If you
build it, will we come? Large Scale Digital Infrastructures as a Dead End for
Digital Humanities. Historical Social Research/Historische
Sozialforschung, pp.165–186.
