Distributed reading: Literary reading in diverse
               environments
Tully Barnett
12 September 2019

Introduction
Reading has always been a diverse practice, encompassing many different approaches,
activities, perspectives and styles, but we do not currently have a nuanced language
for those different kinds of reading practices. Reading is frequently seen as
something that is learned in early childhood, reducing it to a binary: one can or
cannot read (#douglas2016). There is little granularity in our approach
to this fundamental but under theorised foundational skill and experience. Within the
field of the digital humanities (DH), however we might define it, the attention to
reading has had a different focus. Here, the emphasis on the tension between close
and distant reading, or their similarities and differences, has served to highlight
reading, both in general terms as well as in its specificities, as a foundational and
significant methodology for the humanities. This has been beneficial to the broader
humanities sector. Understanding the tension between close and distant reading and
the assumptions that underlie it, can assist in developing a more nuanced
understanding of what we mean by reading, which will benefit diverse domains of
pedagogy, personal reading, and literary analysis, amongst others. The frames in
which we read are diversifying due to constantly evolving online spaces and the
affordances they invent and proliferate. This article considers the role of reading
in the modern humanities landscape and proposes the notion of distributed reading as
a useful concept for understanding changing reading practices in the digital era.
Using scholarship from both book history and new media studies, this paper uses the
concept of interface, following Johanna Drucker, to consider the multitude of diverse
experiences that is literary reading across different platforms in and out of the
classroom. The paper argues that the notion of critical infrastructure studies can
help us better understand the broader material, structural and container issues of
literary production, circulation and immersion that is reading in the contemporary
moment. I ask whether distracted reading – which has a pejorative connotation, of
poor reading, shallow reading – can be better understood as distributed reading, a
reading across frames, surfaces, platforms, modes and materials. I pursue this
question by looking at two related case studies: mass digitization project texts and
the characteristics of online reading platforms found in those archives. Through
these case studies, I consider the experience of distributed reading in practice.
Reading is changing in large part because the frames within which reading occurs are
changing; they are becoming more complex. This requires new ways of understanding
reading in the digital age. The notion of distributed reading acknowledges that
reading and the immersive experiences that go with reading occur across spectrums of
attention, frames, technologies, purposes as well as time and space. The concept of
distributed reading seeks to account for reading as an evolving practice. The frames
across which our reading is distributed co-construct our relation to the text and the
meaning we derive from it in ways as yet under theorised. Reading is not a static
event but is parcelled out across different kinds of spaces. Reading can occur in
multiple formats, across multiple platforms for the one text. For example, a novel
begun in print can be read online in a born-digital format and concluded in a scanned
digital format. These journeys across platform, frame and format require deeper
investigation and further complicating what it is we mean by reading in the age of
the digital.
Reading in/and the Digital Humanities
The field of digital humanities has had much input from literary studies and other
text-based humanities disciplines and scholarship. The place of reading in this has
yet to be fully considered. In part, this is because of the debate between close
reading and distant reading that occupies so much space in our field. There are, too,
tensions caused by the likes of Sven Birkerts for whom the material book is almost a
moral imperative and Naomi Baron whose concept of words onscreen
is one of almost, if not quite, diminishment. By looking at the way reading appears
in and out of digital humanities scholarship we can build a better understanding of
the usefulness of the notion of distributed-ness to contemporary reading practices. I
specifically use the awkward construction of distributed-ness here, instead of the
word distribution which might be more grammatically correct, to separate distributed
as a word that casts reading practices across platforms from the notion of the
distribution of books which refers to the physical movement of books (and other media
and non-media content) in shipments around the world.
Reading has always been a contentious and political practice, from the moral panic of
the rise of the novel in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries to the apparent high
culture, low culture divide (#furedi2015) but this has heightened in
recent times because of the way the environments in which we read are changing so
radically (albeit within a continuum of change in inscription practices dating back
millennia) and because of the political environment in which communication occurs.
Naomi Baron asks whether
our growing dependence on reading on
screen contribute[s] to a redefinition of what it means to read?
(#baron2013)
. The stakes are perceived as high. Sven Birkerts is frequently trotted out for
his conservative and alarmist views on the future of reading. For Birkerts, digital
reading signifies the loss not only of the special format of the book, which has
important historic resonances, but of the significant mental capacities that, for
him, are built around and dependent upon that material object . In fact, he goes as far as to identify immersive, long
form literary reading with the very notion of the human (#birkerts2010)
so that the materiality of the traditional text is almost a moral imperative. Others
see this approach as clouded nostalgia for a form for which evolution is part of a
natural order bringing both affordances and costs (#hayles2013). While
still attentive to evidence from the cognitive sciences pointing to the changing
brain in the age of digital immersion – a line evoked by Wolf, Baron, Carr and
Bauerlein though to different ends – Hayles, among others, is seeking a more nuanced
understanding of reading in the digital age and the sector is calling for deeper
understanding of the new affordances of reading online.
Anne Mangen signals concern for particular types of reading in the distributed
digital age. For Mangen,
the dispersion of literary reading to an
increasing number of portable digital reading devices may prompt, or indeed
necessitate, increased interdisciplinary empirical research on literary
reading
(#mangen2016)
but that it will require approaches beyond the traditional disciplines to do
so. Mangen finds that electronic reading environments, and in particular the iPad,
may have a negative effect on the generation of empathy in narrative settings . She argues that
the future of literary reading in a time
of increasing digitization is too multifaceted, complex, multilayered to be
studied entirely within disciplinary boundaries, and the consequences of
continuing to do so should not be underestimated
(#mangen2016)
. But others find cognitive science might not be the best approach to
understanding the workings of literary reading [for example: ]. And, all the while, new reports about the health of
the printed book and the industries around it gain headline after headline because we
are, as a culture, really taken with the notion of reading, regardless of how and how
much we personally practice it (#mitchell2016). So, while reading is
all around us as a technical, commercial, consumer, or pedagogical issue, it is, at
the same time, invisible, assumed, under the radar. We do not see reading, as Robert Scholes reminds us
in his much-quoted statement about what happens in the literary studies classroom
(#scholes2002). Reading is an act that occurs in an inner
landscape that cannot be observed directly. We can only see some of the things that
go on around it. Into this debate comes the contribution from the digital humanities
of the methodology (and value) of
distant reading
(#moretti2005)
or
macroanalysis
(#jockers2013)
. Further alarming the likes of Birkerts, this practice is perceived to be a
form of abstract reading, to efface the individual text in a corpus, and to outsource
the act of reading to a machine or algorithm.
Digitalisation of textuality has also altered the way we understand the act of
reading. Reading of all kinds are now distributed acts across platforms, frames,
media, devices, but, as always, also across purposes and contexts. Some new platforms
for reading are more intimate; the mobile phone screen frequently goes everywhere
with its owner. Some are more social in the way they position the reader’s body or
behaviour or both (#barnett2015). Some platforms are both more social
and more intimate simultaneously. But in addition to the impact of emerging physical
devices for reading, the interfaces that support textual immersion in the digital age
require more consideration.
Perhaps the biggest debate in text-based DH at the moment is that between close and
distant reading. Certainly, the tension between close and distant reading is at the
centre of debates about the humanities and digital humanities, their functions,
histories and futures. The digital humanities, as a field, has inherited problems
about the articulation of the notion of reading from the humanities, problems that
are old and enduring. DH adds to the complexity by contributing notions such as
machine reading that further complicate our understanding of what reading
is, ascribing to the computer, application or algorithm a skill or task we cannot see
entirely and yet we revere across different modes or practices. Digital Humanists
offer a range of views of reading in their works. For Katherine Hayles, online
reading is
a powerful technology for reconfiguring
activity patterns in the brain
(#hayles2007)
, a view representative of attempts to connect the new neuroscience of reading
with age-old practices of literary endeavour. Franco Moretti’s distant reading comes
to us in a wave of rethinking reading in light of both theory and pedagogy, of the
death and future of the book. While for Lesjak theory and reading are oppositional (
theory is on its way out; reading is
(back) in
(#lesjak2013)
), Alan Liu’s call to bring cultural critique to the digital humanities is an
opportunity to find a useful balance between the two approaches and refuse to see
them as separate (#liu2012). New methods or approaches to reading, such
as distant reading (#moretti2005), reparative reading , and surface reading (#best2009), remind us
that we need to work to make reading more visible, to understand reading as in a more
modulated or granulated way, and alert us to the fact that there is still more work
to do. Reading occupies a special place in the humanities’ imaginary. Close reading
is seen as the signature skill of the Humanities, the
sacred icon of literary studies
(#hayles2010)
and the primary methodology
of the Humanities (#jockers2013). Attempts to promote data
intensive approaches to humanities research are not necessarily oppositional to
traditional forms of reading in the humanities. In fact, for Stephen Ramsay
algorithmic criticism is fully
compatible with the goals of criticism … critical reading practices already
contain elements of the algorithmic
(#ramsay2011)
. In his article From Reading to Social Computing
Alan Liu comes to the conclusion that:
Ultimately, it may be that experiencing and
communicating literature through social-computing technologies will do more
than supplement older reading, interpreting, and performing practices. The
payoff will be an evolution in our understanding of the nature of reading,
interpreting, and performing
(#liu2013)

This view, that access to the immersive literary experience through digital frames
may work to support development of our understanding of what reading means, is
desperately required. At the same time, the debate or tension between close and
distant reading is diffusing to some extent with the increasingly articulated view
that close reading and distant reading are not mutually exclusive
(#bode2017). Indeed, the new methodologies do not supplant or even
supplement reading but rather unpack the elements involved in the methodology of
reading in both primary and secondary contexts (which is true for both literary
objects and their criticism). Katherine Bode argues that
close reading and distant reading are not
opposites
(#bode2017)
. For Bode, the perceived clash between distant and close reading is the result
of a particular kind of distant reading suggested by Moretti and Jockers who neglect
the important field of textual scholarship (#bode2017), and, I would
add, book history. Marjorie Perloff suggests something similar when she calls for
differential reading: modes of
reading that incorporate not only close and distant reading but also the practice of
reading subjectively and objectively (#perloff2004). Tanya Clement
picks up on Perloff’s calls for reading methodologies or approaches that incorporate
differential reading …
practices
(#clement2013)
, arguing that by incorporating these different but complementary approaches we
can make greater advances in literary interpretation because of their dissimilarity
and their complementarity. The apparent tension between close and distant reading is
ameliorated through a practice that privileges a differential approach. However, in
addition to these important interventions into kinds of reading that may or may not
be afforded by digitalisation – the move to digital surrogate artefacts – we need to
pay attention to the impact of the infrastructures of reading. The concept of
distribution needs to be accounted for, not in the old sense of the infrastructure
between publisher and reader throughout bookshops or other modes of bookselling, but
distribution in the sense of acts of reading that occur across devices, platforms or
material modes. We do not yet have the language or theoretical frameworks to account
for these changes.
The notion of distribution as an effect of particular relevance in the digital age
does not have as much purchase or controversy as the debate over close versus distant
reading. Laura Mandell uses, or perhaps coins, the term distributed reading in her 2012 work Breaking the Book
(#mandell2015) but the term appears in that format only in a
chapter title. Mandell’s book focuses on the time of the rise of mass print in order to understand how print
functions differently in the digital age (#mandell2015). For
Mandell’s purposes, distributed reading refers both to mass distribution of print at
an historical moment and to a player in distributing thinking which she understands
as embodied, as distributed across tools and interfaces. Mandell asks:
What happens to the discipline of
English when both the texts that we investigate and the filters we use allow us
to range widely over what is really, this time, the whole field of literature,
including ephemera and the allegedly non-literary? We are looking forward to an
era of reading that is evenly distributed.
(#mandell2015)

For Mandell, then, the distribution relates to the filters, definitions and
field-building occurring in literary studies as well as to access. There is an
optimism here, that a focus on distributed reading means that we account more for
meaning generated out of engagements with other components of the literary, and even
with non-literary entanglements. Meaning is recognised as emanating from more than
the words on the page. This is not a controversial suggestion but has implications
for the digitization of literature when we consider, for example, the difference
between a Project Gutenberg copy of an out-of-copyright novel (typed into the archive
by volunteers) and a Google Books/Hathi Trust version of the same novel, scanned in
by Google or library staff. More on this below. Taking a different tack but still
focussing on the many entanglements of the material/digital divide, Johanna Drucker
uses the term distributed
materiality to think through the locatedness of the text .
Distributed materiality focuses on the complex of
interdependencies on which any digital artifact depends for its basic
existence. In a distributed approach, any digital entity
is dependent on servers, networks, software, hosting environments and the
relations among them just as surely as a biological entity depends upon
atmospheric and climatic conditions.
(#drucker2013)
This, as I argue below, can be read as a call for an infrastructure studies
approach to the study of reading and literary experiences. For Drucker, it is more
useful to think not about the reception of a text so much as the performance of it.
The text not as object but as event (#drucker2013). This is a
useful aid to thinking about the many breaches of the overtly material into the
overtly digital, which will be considered in the case studies below. Certainly, the
consideration of digital literary artefacts has had significant pay-off for our
thinking around the material object.
The encounter of texts and digital media has reinforced
theoretical realizations that printed materials are not static, self-identical
artifacts and that the act of reading and interpretation is a performative
intervention in a textual field that is charged with potentiality.
(#drucker2009)
This idea that no texts are static, material or digital, and that reading is a
performance is true of all reading; but these are notions especially complicated by
digitization which presents a case that is neither exactly electronic nor print but
is, rather, a hybrid object. Elsewhere, Drucker signals her growing interest in the
impact of interfaces on interpretation arguing that we often
take interface for a thing, static,
stable, and fixed. Or we take it as a representation of computational
processes, a convenient translation of what is really going
on inside
(#drucker2013)
. We look through interfaces – they are often invisible or at least
self-effacing. Following Drucker, then, we can see interfaces and processes, like
readings and interpretations, as performances. They are contingent spaces where
elements come together in diverse ways to create interpretive environments that
support readings.
In this view, the
mediating structures of interface
signify by their graphical organization (they do not just display information
transferred to us by reading)
(#drucker2013)
. In which case, according to Drucker, it becomes essential to take on the task
of understanding how interfaces
organize our relation to complex systems (rather than how
they represent them) and, maybe more important but less tangible, to understand
how an interface works as a boundary space (though it masquerades as a reified
image or menu of options)
(#drucker2013)
. Interface has a distributed component to it that needs unpacking. Drucker
emphasises that
a book is conceived as a
distributed object, not a thing, but a set of
intersection events, material conditions and activities
Drucker 2014, 12, original emphasis
. For Drucker, then, distribution emerges as a key quality for the
representation of knowledge in digital environments. These approaches to
understanding how reading is changing in the increasingly digital textual environment
demonstrates how these shifts have the capacity to teach us something new about
reading itself. That is, the shift to the digital teaches us something about all
kinds of reading: digital, material, online, offline, handwritten, typed. This set of
conditions provides an important opportunity to pursue and develop that more nuanced
notion of reading that the scholarly community is calling for
(#manarin2012). The common component amongst these perspectives is
infrastructure, if we take a broader understanding of what infrastructure for text,
literature and the humanities might be.
Two case studies of distributed reading as a quality of infrastructure will
illuminate these shifts in reading and enable us to think about how distributed-ness
plays into the new conditions for reading. First, the mass digitization archive
(Google Books, Hathi Trust, Internet Archive) presents a challenge for thinking about
acts of reading through an interface. Second, I will look at the various frames that
inhabit those archives and consider their implications for reading.
Reading in the mass digitization archive
Reading in, though, with or against archives (personal, institutional, corporate,
private, public etc) has a long history. Libraries, archives and other collections
have markers, policies and gatekeepers in both their material and digital contexts.
The rhetoric that Google uses in promoting its digitization work infuses the project
with utopian tones, as being primarily about access to the vast archive of human
knowledge, to preserve and disseminate that knowledge, or as much as is digitizable,
and provide open access to that record beyond the material library with their
stubbornly persistent geographical locations. In contrast to this, critics argue that
the mass digitization project demotes the role of authors in the provision of
literary culture and knowledge and so prevents them from gaining a living by their
work (#hoffmann2016). It is argued, too, that this underwrites the
decline of the book as a physical material object, and that it imposes a significant
cost upon libraries in accommodating the project and upon the books themselves in the
process of being digitized. And to what purpose or benefit, critics argue, given the
high rates of error and incomprehensibility in the archive and given the changing
(deteriorating) relationship between the partner libraries and Google throughout the
project (#hoffmann2016). The discourse is thick with contradictions:
knowledge is free and common but also retained and commercialised, books are
preserved (saved?) through their disassembly (dismemberment?).
The digital archive, frequently built through the rhetoric of accessibility, brings
with it a whole new set of gatekeeping strategies to negotiate. The Google Books
project has received a great deal of media attention mostly centred on the legal
struggles to establish an understanding of fair use and copyright in a changing
textual environment (#barnett2016). Projects such as The Art of Google Books have registered and circulated the
oddities found in mass digitization archives (#wilson). Meanwhile,
Andrew Norman Wilson has drawn attention to the labour issues in mass digitization
projects (#wilson2016)
(#barnett2016). Increasingly, scholars are turning to the history of
digitization practices to develop an understanding of what digitization means for the
human record and the way we interact with and draw meaning from it (; ; (#bode2017);
(#barnett2016)). Conway’s analysis of errors in the Hathi Trust
archive is a useful intervention, concluding that to preserve
the products of large-scale digitization is a decision to preserve
imperfection
(#conway2013). This provides us with information about the
usability of the archive but what we really need are qualitative accounts so that we
can consider what not only these imperfections within the archive might mean but also
the larger questions about the systems, interfaces and frames within which
digitization and mass digitization projects operate and what they mean for readers of
all kinds. The archives of mass digitization projects like Google Books, the Hathi
Trust, the Internet Archive and so on highlight important questions about what is
lost and what is gained when we commit to digital that which was (is still somewhere)
material. They highlight the significance of the material as the object becomes
(imperfect) digitization. By providing the digital image of scans alongside the text
of their content, mass digitization projects re-emphasise the material components of
the text.
This rising significance of the material in an era of digitization is felt elsewhere
too. Andrew Stauffer’s Book Traces project at the
University of Virginia, a project that collects and records unique items in library
books (mostly marginalia but also bookmarks, notepaper, leaves, strands of hair and
so on) underscores the significance of the individual copy of a text in a market of
hundreds or thousands (#stauffer2015). As projects such as Stauffer’s
and Wilson’s demonstrate, errors and idiosyncrasies in the digitization archive
generate a cognitive dissonance that reveals something about the inner workings of
the relationship between the human and the printed text. When we encounter breaches
of the material inside the immaterial archive (such as marginalia, ephemera,
institutional stamps, scan errors) in Google Books scans, the
thingness of the object in front of us is undermined. Its
hybrid nature is revealed. It melds the material and the digital together in one
space.
That materiality and how we can understand its changing nature in the digital age is
of increasing concern in the literature. We have come a long way since Mark Poster
declared in 1990 that word processing
removes all traces of individuality from
writing
(#poster1990)
. He argued that the material object’s inevitable individuality (regardless of
mass production) was not available to the digital object. But Hayles’ work combining
electronic literary studies with the field of new materialism and the media
archaeology of Jussi Parikka and so on have debunked this limited view. Rather than
the illusion of reading online as a dematerialised experience, human traces in the
archive as they appear in the Google Books archive are profound reminders of the
hybridity of the scan. They impact how we read and respond to the texts, as any
material characteristic does. They also shape our interpretations, by providing
companion readers or markings of authority or disagreement, complementing or in some
cases rendering the printed text unreadable. In doing so they highlight both the
supposed immateriality of the electronic document and its former materiality,
signalling its own metamorphoses and causing a level of cognitive dissonance in the
reading moment. These material traces are permanent, in so far as any digital object
is permanent. They are anachronistic, causing the reader to do cognitive work to
accommodate the slippage between material and immaterial, between then and now. They
are disruptive to our relationship with the immaterial text. They reveal other
readers inside the text with you as not just through markings on the page – a
co-presence that is as true for the material book as for the digital scan – but also
of the human infrastructure in the production.
But where errors of materiality in the Google and Hathi Trust book archives are
accidental and erroneous, the intentional inclusion of material imagery in digital
reading experiences serves to help the reader navigate the text in familiar ways and
forms the subject for my second case study here. The material trace on the text is of
benefit to the reading process as more and more electronic reading platforms take on
the physical attributes of material reading experiences (#barnett2015).
The lively discourse surrounding Google Books and the human breaches of the material
into the immaterial, as the work crosses the borders of formats, raises valuable
questions about the future of the book, reading in the twenty-first century and the
long and formidable shadow that centuries of material text production casts over
Google Books’ electronic utopia. This interface establishes itself as a hybrid of
digital and material. In addition to scan errors, the markers of the material text
(perhaps aged or stained paper, markings by readers, institutional or gifting stamps,
and so on) is now preserved in a digital image. The work is made available through an
interface, a set of features that frame the text within the archive space. This
heightens the sense of dislocation created by the merging of two formats. This
framing is the subject of the second case study I consider here in service of a
better understanding of the concept of distributedness in reading.
Framing reading
Where early attempts at creating ebooks lifted the content from its original material
conditions of the book, the page and its bindings and rendered it in a text window
with no reference to the iconography of the original material context, it was not
long before imagery of the material elements of the books returned to the zone of
e-reading with skeuomorphs representing the visual and auditory cues of reading . As more electronic reading platforms take on the physical
attributes or affordances of material reading experiences, these quasi-materialities
influence the reading experience, and they frame it, taking on the role of the
interface. They serve as interfaces through which reading is filtered according to
familiar iconography of the printed book experience.
Drucker’s notion of frames helps us to think about the influence of interface in the
distributed experience of reading. Some of these elements or characteristics have
analogue equivalents but others are unique to the digital realm. Regardless, these
elements activate a higher level of awareness of the distribution. Drucker argues
that the cognitive skills of human beings work to create sense and meaning by
stitching fragments of what are
graphically related elements together into a narrative … But in the graphically
complex multimedia environment of the web, no pre-existing narrative organizes
our task of correlation. We are constantly in the frame jumping state that
disorients the reader, trying to create relations across varied types of
material – images, videos, maps, graphs, texts, and the many structuring
elements of layout and format that organize the graphic environment.
(#drucker2011)
For all the benefits of distributed reading, then, reading across frames and
materialities, the experience of frame jumping also comes at the cognitive cost of
load.
As an example of frames in the archive, consider the context-rich and thoughtfully
laid out interface of the Hathi Trust. The structuring elements of the layout
form an important agent in the distribution of the reading. See for example Figures 1 and 2, which demonstrate many of these elements
in action. Here the book is marked with the institutional book plate of the
University of Michigan, complete with the name of the donor whose gift made possible
the purchase of the book. This imbues the work with different kinds of authority
(institutional, academic, professional, librarianship). In the bottom right hand
corner, we can see the residue of fingers of scanners caught on the page during the
scanning process. Quality control processes have attempted to minimize the disruption
to the text but cannot erase it completely and in this way the human being scanning
the book becomes a permanent reader inside the text with the reader/user. The age of
the book and its worn state is evident through rips and tears, bindings coming loose
and displaying the inner workings of the material book. But these elements are
flattened under the glass of the scanner (real or metaphorical) – the gesture is to
the textured but at the same time flattening effect of the scanning renders it
untouchable. We have to do a lot of cognitive work in frame jumping to process this.

Middlemarch as housed in the Hathi Trust


Middlemarch as housed in the Hathi Trust

In addition, there are multiple frames at work on the
page
(#mak2011)
. As well as the traditional frames of the print book – page, border, gutter
and so on – the archive’s reading interface presents a range of tools that frame, at
different levels, the reading space and the text. The reader has choices – one page
at a time (where the logic of the scroll operates in moving from one page to the
next) or the double page spread (where the skeuomorphic visual element of the turning
of the page is introduced and other visual cues of material books such as gutters,
margins, and so on can be rendered) (#hayles1999). Some of these frames
are navigational – they help the reader to move throughout the text object and the
archive that houses it. But
navigation is never natural; it is
always the expression of a set of cultural assumptions and controls
(#drucker2008)
There are contextual elements down the left-hand side, many offering literal
(ie click here) or metaphorical (ie other components to consider such as the
paratextual information) exits from the work of immersive literary reading. Instead
of reading, one can curate, browse, share (in a wide range of formats), play. Figure 2 shows additional interface elements. The
authorizing marks seen here in the form of an institutional bookplate confer a level
of authority on the text. In this case not only can we see which institutional
repository or university library it comes from but we can also see which donation
fund the book was purchased with.
Even at the level of the page much distraction occurs. Bonnie Mak uses the history of
the textual interface to demonstrate the way human thinking and interpreting develops
alongside the material components of what she calls
the signifying strategies of the
page
(#mak2011)
– a frame of reference that impacts every aspect of textuality (tablet, scroll
and now printed and bound pages and even into the webpage). She argues
From a young age we are trained to believe
that the boundaries of the interface are always identical to the edges of the
material platform of the page – namely, that the cognitive space and the
physical dimension of the page are necessarily coterminous. But the page has
not always been circumscribed in this way
(#mak2011)
For Mak these signifying strategies follow, though in complicated ways, from
the printed text to the electronic text. But again, the hybridity of the digitized
page and the structures it exists within mean these examples require further
unpacking. Mak goes on to argue that
the materiality of the page influences its
own reception across technology, language, geography and time
(#mak2011)
. The materiality of the page continues to inform literary and immersive
reading.
And in addition to these visual elements in the co-production of the digitized text,
the role of other elements in the chain from scan to book require unpacking. For
example, an infrastructure approach to digital reading requires accounting for the
role of such groups as the Distributed Proofreaders who volunteer their time to
correct errors in the OCR record of items in the Internet Archive and other
crowdsourced activities. These more formalized activities are complemented in every
archive by labour with various levels of acknowledgement, sometimes crowdsourced such
as the proofreaders who spend time correcting the Trove newspaper digitizations.
Little is known about the Google Books archive’s OCR correction processes. These are
further distributions in the network that require accounting for.
The emerging field of critical digital infrastructure studies or critical humanities
infrastructure studies ((#liu2016); ) provides a growing framework for thinking through
questions about the foundations on which the knowledge production processes
underpinning humanities and cultural research, knowledge and communication rest.
Critical infrastructure studies may offer a way of thinking about how all the things
we produce in the arts, humanities and culture can be understood as a system of
communication. We can interrogate the functions and co-minglings of these elements at
both macro and micro levels. The field provides a more structured way of thinking
about a number of Humanities infrastructure objects such as the Google Books project,
the Hathi Trust, the Internet Archive, Trove and so on as part of a bigger set of
infrastructural conditions globally. The structures in which we hold, display,
preserve and provide access to our cultural objects and information has an influence
on that culture and its reception and interpretation. The frames we impose on them,
the navigational devices that ensure usability and interoperability but which are
nevertheless interpretive devices, require more understanding. The Galleries,
Libraries, Archives and Museums sector contributes much to this knowledge . However, with a few exceptions , digital collections management processes tend not to
emphasize this in the production of their tools and structures. Deb Verhoeven argues
that
cultural infrastructure is not a
passive conduit, it catalyzes for better or worse. It is a technology that
holds a social promise, not just a technical one
(#verhoeven2016)
. Critical infrastructure studies afford a way of talking about these, often
invisible, elements of digital design. Alan Liu reminds us that it is essential to
consider the usually invisible support structures such as labour, administration,
hardware and graphical user interfaces that underpin the provision of digital
cultural material for access and research, because these structures thoroughly
influence the means by which we access cultural objects and data internationally . Arguing that thinking about ‘middleware’ as a concept and as concrete platforms can help us
pay more attention to the ways tools structure our arguments or express thinking
in protocols programmed into these platforms, Drucker and Svensson
highlight a new way of accounting for the software and hardware of virtual and
digital objects (#drucker2016). For James Smithies, in his book Digital Modern: Humanities and New Media
(#smithies2017)
Technical infrastructures – especially
capacious ones like global humanities cyberinfrastructure – present an
additional layer of interpretative complexity because of their combination of
technical as well as socio-political (and perhaps aesthetic) complexity that
leads to deep inscrutability
(#smithies2017)
. The interpretive complexities and epistemic extrusions
that are posed by cultural infrastructure projects when we see them as media in their
own right, as material components that shape to some extent the way we see the
cultural objects assessed through them, deserve more attention that we currently give
them.
A critical humanities infrastructure approach opens up to critique the systems,
interactions and platforms of culture and knowledge production in ways that have not
been possible before. It recognizes that
infrastructure is not neutral
(#verhoeven2016)
and seeks to understand the operational and cultural logics of humanities
infrastructure projects. We are looking at a future in which cultural objects are
preserved, accessed, shared and understood (interpreted) within the hardware and
software frames that process them and make them available. To return to the work of
Liu, there is an argument that
critique at the level of, and articulated
through, infrastructure – where infrastructure, the
social-cum-technological milieu that at once enables the fulfillment of human
experience and enforces constraints on that experience, today has much of the
same scale, complexity, and general cultural impact as the idea of
culture itself
(#liu2016)
.
The concept of critical infrastructure studies provides a useful way of thinking
about mass digitization projects, such as Google Books, the Hathi Trust, the Internet
Archive, the digitization strategies of individual libraries, as part of a bigger set
of infrastructural conditions and as part of a history and future of reading, the
conditions of which impact the experience of reading, interpretation, literary
culture and, ultimately, the very institution of literature. This is crucial in order
to understand the nature of reading in a digitised and distributed environment. But
it is also crucial because the way we understand textuality in digitised spaces has a
direct impact on the way we frame the study of literature for tertiary students and
the practice of immersive literary experience across all educational and personal
reading. A focus and more nuanced understanding of interfaces and infrastructures of
reading enable students to understand the impact of their reading decisions on the
way they relate to the texts they read for pleasure, study or work. Similarly, the
results of the Academic Book of the Future project show that we do not yet know
enough about reader behaviour in online environments to understand the full potential
or the cost of enhanced ebooks for scholarly communication or digital environments
for more traditional outputs (#deegan2017). The work we do as scholars
and teachers, and inevitably, the way we provide learning environments for students
will be fundamentally altered by changing reading behaviours and the infrastructures
that support them.
Conclusion
How we frame the use of and relationship to electronic literature and digital reading
environments will impact cultural work for decades, centuries and perhaps forever. In
the Coda to The Cambridge Companion to Textual
Scholarship, philologist Jerome McGann, instigator of the Rosetti Archive
that bred a range of large scale literature-centric DH projects, argues that scholars
are obligated
to surveille and monitor this process of
digitization
(#mcgann2013)
in order to understand the impact of the structure, infrastructure and
interface, amongst other factors, upon the content, its use and its interpretation.
Just as book history has provided a way of thinking (or a diversity of ways of
thinking) about what the book is as a concept and event, joining together a multitude
of individual objects known as books under the umbrella of book history, so too does
a critical infrastructure studies approach pull together thinking, methods,
frameworks from a variety of disciplines to think at the concept level about the
impact of digitization and digital reading environments on the reception of the
literary work.
Reframing distracted reading as distributed reading embeds the perspective that
reading, and the thinking that goes along with it, occurs over devices, platforms,
features, networks, contexts, and that these can usefully be understood as forming an
infrastructure of reading. This emphasizes the crowding of our reading experience
with unacknowledged inanimate others. If we think of the printed book as an interface
between two orders of thinking, as I argue the work of Drucker and others implies, we
need to consider how the experience of reading a digitized version of a formerly
printed and bound book alters literary reception, student experience and the
practices of scholarship. The lively discourse surrounding Google Books and the human
breaches of the material into the immaterial, as the work crosses the borders of
formats and interfaces, raises valuable questions about not only the future of the
book as the container for literary and textual output, but, more consequentially, for
reading in the twenty-first century, and the long and formidable shadow that
centuries of material text production casts over Google Books’ electronic utopia.
Reading across platforms, then, complicates immersion even as it increases access.
Since the material is so significant to reception, as we know it is, then surely
different material experiences of the one literary engagement (text) affects the
reading of the book. This has implications not only for reception and interpretation
of texts but also at the more general level of information literacy. Anne Mangen’s
work, for example, seeks to point out what some of these effects may be . A residual challenge may be to develop a typology of
reading and reading-inflected cognition that accounts for the distributed nature of
electronic reading environments. Reading is an under-theorised and under-attended
component of interactions we have with text in online and off-line spaces, in
material and digital forms. In addition to this general lack of understanding, the
digital environments for reading offer unique challenges and affordances that we best
account for in order to be able to mitigate or accentuate.
An important project ahead for the humanities, then, is to consider the impact of
digitising on reading, not as a separate concern for librarians and collections
professionals or technicians, not under the banner of accessibility or
interoperability, but as a factor at the centre of what reading means, at the level
of critique. While it is not at all radical to suggest that we account for the
material conditions under which the literary texts we read, analyse, and teach were
produced (#kirschenbaum2012) it is perhaps the complicated making of
the set of networks and conditions in which the digitized/digitalized novel exists
that has led to its relative lack of attention. Reading studies has much to learn
from DH and from comparative textual media studies and infrastructure studies
approaches and, significantly, vice versa. Central to this has to be a better
understanding of the story of digitization as it shapes up to be the most significant
project for humanities scholarship into the future. Digitization needs to be
understood as a cultural practice. In this article, I have attempted to make the case
for this and to demonstrate the unique place of reading in this interdisciplinary
mix. Digital Humanities needs to consider reading beyond close or distant.
Distributed reading is a way of unpacking the complex relationship between the
material and the digital and some half way space that injects the iconography of
materiality into the digital literary experience. Despite all the attention reading
has received in recent years, we still struggle to talk usefully and in a granulated
way about what reading is and what it is in different modes, environments, or
moments. The plethora of digital devices, platforms and interfaces only further
complicates this, and raises the stakes for reading. But at the same time, it opens
up new ways of thinking about reading and new avenues for interdisciplinary
investigation. Ultimately, this renders many elements of reading, if not reading
itself, more visible which can only benefit the field.


Barnett, T. Social
reading: The Kindle’s social highlighting functionemerging reading
practices.
Australian Humanities Review 56. May. (2014)
Barnett, T. Platforms for Social Reading: Material Imagery in Digital Books.
Scholarly and Research Communication 6.4 (2015)
Barnett, T. The
Human Trace in Google Books. In Glenn, Diana and Graham Tulloch (eds)
Border crossings. Mile End, SA: Wakefield Press, pp.
53-83 (2016)
Baron, N. S. Redefining reading: The impact
of digital communication media. PMLA, 128.1 (2013):
193-200.
Baron, N. Words
onscreen: The fate of reading in a digital world. Oxford University Press
(2015)
Bauerlein, M. The Dumbest Generation — How the Digital Age Stupefies Young Americans and
Jeopardizes Our Future. Penguin, New York (2008)
Birkerts, S. The
Gutenberg elegies: The fate of reading in an electronic age. Farrar,
Straus and Giroux (2006)
Birkerts. Reading
in a digital age: notes on why the novel and the internet are opposites, and why
the latter both undermines the former and makes it more necessary. The American Scholar, 79.2, (2010) pp. 32-44.
Best, S. and Marcus, S. Surface reading: An introduction. Representations, 108.1 (2009), pp. 1-21.
Bode, K. Reading by
Numbers: Recalibrating the Literary Field. Anthem Press (2012).
Bode, K. The Equivalence
of Close and Distant Reading; or, Toward a New Object for Data-Rich
Literary History (MLQ 2017).
Bode, K. A World of
Fiction: Digital Collections and the Future of Literary History. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press (2018).
Bode, K., and P. L. Arthur. Collecting Ourselves.
Advancing Digital Humanities. Palgrave Macmillan UK,
2014. 1-12.
Burrows, T., and D.
Verhoeven. Aggregating data for social linking in the humanities
and creative arts: the Humanities Networked Infrastructure
(HuNI).
Signa: Revista de la Asociación Española de Semiótica 25
(2016): 109-119.
Carr, N. The shallows:
What the Internet is doing to our brains. WW NortonCompany
(2011).
Clement, T. Text
Analysis, Data Mining, and Visualizations in Literary Scholarship
Literary Studies in the Digital Age: An Evolving
Anthology. MLA’s HCommons DOI: 10.1632/lsda.2013.8
Conway, P. Page-Image Error in Large-Scale
Digitization. In Archiving Conference 1 (2013): 36-42.
Deegan, M. The
Academic Book and the Future Project Report: A Report to the AHRC and the British
Library, London. https://academicbookfuture.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/project-report_academic-book-of-the-future_deegan3.pdf
(accessed 23 August 2017).
Douglas, K., Barnett, T., Poletti,
A., Seaboyer, J., and Kennedy, R. Building reading resilience: re-thinking reading
for the literary studies classroom. Higher Education Research
Development, 35.2 (2016), pp. 254-266.
Drucker, J. Graphic
devices: narration and navigation. Narrative 16, no. 2 (2008): 121-139.
Drucker, J. SpecLab: digital aesthetics and projects in speculative computing.
University of Chicago Press (2009).
Drucker, J. Humanities approaches to interface theory. Culture
Machine 12 (2011).
Drucker, J. Performative materiality and theoretical approaches to interface. Digital Humanities Quarterly, 7(1). (2013)
Drucker, J., and P.
Svensson. The Why and How of Middleware.
DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly 10.2 (2016)
Elfenbein, Andrew. Cognitive Science and the History of Reading. PMLA, 121(2), 484-502. (2006) Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/25486327 (accessed 27 August 2017).
Furedi, F. Power of
Reading: From Socrates to Twitter. London: Bloomsbury (2015).
Gooding, P., Terras, M.,
Warwick, C. The myth of the new: Mass digitization, distant reading, and the future
of the book. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 28.4
(2013): 629-639.
Hayles, N.K. How we
became posthuman: Virtual bodies in cybernetics, literature, and
informatics. University of Chicago Press (1999).
Hayles, N.K. Hyper
and deep attention: The generational divide in cognitive modes. Profession, 1 (2007): 187-199.
Hayles, N.K. How we
read: Close, hyper, machine. ADE
Bulletin, 150.18 (2010): 62-79.
Hayles, N.K. and Pressman,
J. Comparative textual media: Transforming the humanities in
the postprint era. University of Minnesota Press. (2013)
Hoffmann, A.L. Google Books, Libraries, and Self-Respect: Information Justice beyond
Distributions. The Library Quarterly, 86.1
(2016): 76-92.
Jockers, M.L. Macroanalysis: Digital methods and literary history. University of
Illinois Press. (2013)
Kirschenbaum, Matthew. What is digital humanities and what’s it doing in English
departments?
Debates in DH 3 (2012).
Lesjak, C. Reading
dialectically. In Literary Materialisms (pp.
17-47). Palgrave Macmillan, New York. (2013)
Liu, A. Where is cultural
criticism in the digital humanities? Debates in the
digital humanities, (2012): 490-509.
Liu, A., 2013. From Reading to Social Computing. Literary Studies in the
Digital Age: An Evolving Anthology. Ed. Kenneth M. Price and Ray Siemens. https://dlsanthology.mla.hcommons.org/from-reading-to-social-computing/
Liu, A., 2014. The Big Bang
of Online Reading. In Advancing Digital
Humanities (pp. 274-290). Palgrave Macmillan UK.
Liu, A., et al. Drafts for Against the Cultural Singularity. (2016) http://liu.english.ucsb.edu/drafts-for-against-the-cultural-singularity/
Mak, B., 2011. How the page
matters. University of Toronto Press (2011).
Mak, B., and J. Pollack. On the design of the humanities.
interactions 23.4 (2016): 76-79.
Manarin, K. 2012. Reading value: Student
choice in reading strategies. Pedagogy, 12(2),
281-297.
Mandell, L. 2015. Breaking the book : print humanities in the digital age. Chichester:
Wiley Blackwell.
Mangen, A., 2016. The
digitization of literary reading. Orbis
litterarum, 71(3), pp. 240-262.
Marstine, J. (Ed.). New museum theory and practice: an introduction. Malden,
MA.: Blackwell (2008)
Marstine, J., ed. New museum theory and practice: an introduction. John WileySons
(2008)
McGann, J. Coda: Why
digital textual scholarship matters, or philology in a new key.
The Cambridge companion to textual scholarship (2013):
274-88.
McGregor, H. Remediation as Reading: Digitising The Western Home Monthly.
Archives and Manuscripts 42.3 (2014): 248-257.
Mitchell, S. Bookstores fighting back as print prevails over e-book. Financial Review. 6 Feb. 2016 http://www.afr.com/business/bookstores-fighting-back-as-print-prevails-over-ebooks-20160203-gmkhqc

Moretti, F. Graphs,
maps, trees: abstract models for a literary history. Verso. (2005)
Perloff, M. Differentials: Poetry, Poetics, Pedagogy (2004)
Poster, M. The mode
of information: Poststructuralism and social context. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press (1990).
Ramsay, S. Reading
Machines: Toward and Algorithmic Criticism. University of Illinois Press.
(2011)
Sartori, A. (2016). Towards an
intellectual history of digitization: Myths, dystopias, and discursive shifts in
museum computing. Digital Scholarship in the
Humanities, 31(2), 428-440.
Scholes R. The
transition to college reading. Pedagogy:
Critical 165–172.
Sedgwick, E.K. Paranoid reading and reparative reading, or, You're so paranoid, you probably
think this introduction is about you. (1997)
Smithies, J. The
Digital Humanities and the Digital Modern. London. Palgrave Macmillan.
(2017)
Stauffer, A., Book Traces. (2015).
Verhoeven, D. As Luck Would Have It.
Feminist Media Histories 2.1 (2016): 7-28.
Willis, I. Reception. London: Routledge (2017)
Wilson, A. N. The Artist Leaving the
Googleplex, EFlux. Journal #74 - June 2016 http://www.e-flux.com/journal/74/59791/the-artist-leaving-the-googleplex/

Wilson, K. The Art of Google Books http://theartofgooglebooks.tumblr.com/
Wolf, M. Proust and the
squid: The story and science of the reading brain. Findaway World LLC.
(2008)
