To tree, or not to tree? On the Empirical Basis
                    for Having Past Landscapes to Experience.
Philip I. Buckland
Nicolò Dell'Unto
Gísli Pálsson
19 November 2018

Aims
Our intention with this point of view paper is to help refocus an increasingly
abstract and theoretically orientated Digital Humanities (DH). We will present a
critical perspective on some of the problems and potentials relating to the
visualisation of past (primarily non-urban) landscapes, with particular emphasis
on the use of empirical evidence, from a combined environmental and
archaeological point of view. We will outline some of the major challenges
associated with reconstructing past landscapes from data, and give some examples
of recent attempts to create platforms for addressing some of these issues. We
will also briefly discuss the importance of landscape visualisation in the
context of heritage management.
Introduction and some terminology
Visualization can mean many things to many people. Here we choose to limit
ourselves to the Oxford English Dictionary (#oed2016) definition
of [t]he action or fact of visualizing;
the power or process of forming a mental picture or vision of something not
actually present to the sight; a picture thus formed. For
archaeologists, the only things present to the sight are
the remains or results of past human activities and natural processes; any
modern day landscape is the product of its history and geology. It could be said
that what archaeologists are most often trying to understand - (loosely
speaking) the nature of past human activities and their contexts - are
never
actually present to the sight, and thus that visualization
is an intrinsic part of archaeology. In this paper, we focus primarily on the
visualization of prehistoric, non-urban landscapes, rather than archaeological
sites or structures, and the prerequisites for being able to do this. We use the
term environmental reconstruction almost synonymously with visualization,
the former being the more common expression for any form of quantitative or
qualitative expression of an understanding of a past landscape, or wider
archaeological site context. Whilst there is an increasing interest in the
incorporation of multi-sensorial experiences in archaeological reconstructions
(especially sound, see e.g. (#d)), we will limit the
discussion to the more established visual attributes which are more easily
quantifiable through palaeoenvironmental data. Although yet to be verified
scientifically, it is the opinion of the authors that the word
reconstruction has become a somewhat loaded word in DH discussions,
and we would like to emphasise that we in no way advocate the recreation of
static, absolute and fully accurate reproductions of the past. Our use of the
term implies a more diachronic (2D or 3D) simulation of archaeological and
environmental interpretations based on the interrelationships between the
different (and often few) materials studied by archaeologists and
palaeoecologists. Absolute certainty is against the nature of the scientific
method, and any form of reconstruction is always accompanied by an implicit set
of error margins and notions of transience (see, however,for a discussion of problems with this approach in
relation to Earth Systems science and climate change). In this respect, our
environmental reconstructions are close to those
commonly employed in Quaternary Science (see (#lowe2015)
We use the term archaeology also in its broadest meaning - as a holistic science
incorporating all of its various sub-disciplines, but also any methods
incorporated to enable it to answer complex questions on the nature of the past.
We therefore refer to archaeologists as practitioners of this
holistic science, and ignore the tendency of real world archaeologists to label
themselves within often highly specific sub-fields (although we will name some
of these affiliations for the purpose of illustration; for an overview of
archaeology as a discipline, see (#trigger2006)). Similarly, we
somewhat provocatively lump palaeoecologists (Quaternary scientists) involved in
environmental reconstruction into this super-discipline, as they essentially
undertake the same work as environmental archaeologists, but tend to be less
reluctant to investigate times and places which lack any evidence of human
activity. Palaeoecologists are those who collect data on past landscapes, using
methods which study a variety of sources, from the properties of the sediments
themselves to fossil pollen and insects. These sources, which some find
analogous to artefacts and other archaeological materials (i.e. ecofacts; ), are commonly referred to as proxy data
sources, due to their use as proxies for past environmental change.

Theory, history and practice
There have been numerous attempts to inject a post-structural approach to
visualizing past landscapes into archaeology. In the early 1990s, a number of
archaeologists began emphasizing the importance of subjective experience in the
process of understanding the existence of prehistoric peoples in their landscape
contexts (e.g. (#tilley1994) for
a critique). These authors were perhaps influenced by the perceptual geographers
of the previous decades (e.g. (#tuan1977), ; (#pocock1989)) as much as their contemporaries in archaeology
and anthropology (e.g. (#ingold1993)) and geography (e.g. ), and characterized a rising tide of post-modern
landscape archaeology riding in the sea of post-processual archaeology (see ). Although perhaps not intentionally, such work
spurred on a habitual partitioning of academic practitioners of archaeology into
the schools of the theorist and the scientist; the
latter denoting specialists in the objective, empirically orientated
archaeological sciences Note that we in no way intend to suggest theory is
not science! and the former tending away from this into the use of
more conjectural arguments to describe the past (see (#yoffee1993)
for a collection of contemporary narratives and (#johnson2006) for
further discussion). Despite this dichotomy, a large number of archaeologists,
including a large and fundamentally pragmatic body residing outside of
academia Archaeology is to a large degree professionalised, with
consultancy or contract archaeology, as well as museums, representing the
larger part of archaeological excavation and data acquisition
internationally. , have maintained the archaeological tradition of
acquiring and using whichever theories and methods were most appropriate or
accessible for solving the questions at hand (but seefor some thoughts on potential problems and possibilities resulting from the
separation of academic and commercial archaeology). As a result, there are now
increasingly large amounts of empirical data available, in a vast array of
archives, from which past environments can be modelled (see e.g. ).
A number of environmental archaeologists were engaged in, or later reflected
over, these discussions (e.g. (#evans2003)), but many more
continued to work in the tradition of the natural sciences, follow in
hypo-deductive or inductive methodologies. Having theoretical frameworks for the
interpretation of evidence from the past is, of course, extremely important, and
concepts such as modern analogues, taphonomy, representivity and statistical
significance are just examples of the multiple aspects of these. When it comes
to populating landscapes with human actions, cultures and societies there are
naturally other requirements, including social theory, agency, supply and demand
and many other concepts, but these are outside the scope of this paper.
Archaeology has, in the words of Matthew Johnson, moved beyond the site ; the site being the accepted term for the
geographical location of evidence for past human activity, or archaeological
remains (see (#reitz2012) for an environmental archaeology
orientated discussion). After early forays beyond the trench that would perhaps
better be described as sites-based rather than
landscape-based (e.g. (#beck1995)), recent developments within
archaeology and heritage studies have begun to consider the environment not
simply as a Cartesian container of archaeological features but as a human
artefact in itself (#fairclough2002). This is a conceptualization
that converges with the generally more spatially orientated, yet less
anthropocentric, approach to landscapes expressed in Quaternary science. The
Anthropocene concept of the geological age of humanity is perhaps a culmination
of these perspectives on the importance of humans as active parts of a landscape
(see both (#foley2013) for
Anthropocene discussions from both sides of the convergence).
The idea of representing the material record as a collection of points has been
under sustained criticism in the past two decades (see, for instance,for an overview of these critiques). The notion that
cultural activity only took place where traces of cultural activity are present
misses the point that being in the landscape is an all-encompassing engagement
with the environment, and that traces of this engagement extend beyond
recognizably anthropogenic features. The points, in a sense, can be thought of
as spatially scattered fragments lacking a conjoining context. Depending on the
nature of the evidence preserved at these points, environmental archaeology may
provide the potential to reveal certain aspects of this landscape context
through proxy data sources. The landscape itself also tells a different story to
that found in historical archives (#clark2003). Clark, Darlington
and Fairclough (ibid.) have argued that
landscape is a medium of understanding the past, a
pathway into our memories
(#clark2003)
. It is also seen as a medium to manage issues
where people and land come
together
(#makarow2010)
, and to combine the efforts of academic disciplines and governmental
bodies traditionally scattered across several research domains.
Heritage management and landscapes
Approaches to landscape in archaeological and heritage governance have broadened
significantly in the past decades, particularly in Europe and with regard to the
conceptualization of landscape. The broadening of scope began in the late 1980s
and continued to develop throughout the 1990s, led by the initiative of English
Heritage (now known as Historic England). The agency acknowledged the
theoretical issues in protecting only sites on a list such as the Historic
Environment Record (HER) and began to argue for approaches moving beyond the
site itself. Initially, the focus was still on monuments (now in their landscape
context), but then moved to the historic and archaeological dimension of the
entire landscape, whether site-based or not (#fairclough2002).
A similar development can be seen in the process leading to the European
Landscape Convention (ELC). Initially, the aim was to define and list Heritage
Landscape Sites (#darvill1993); essentially a register of the
best components of the landscape, based on various
criteria mostly concerned with aesthetics and closeness to a supposed
natural origin with little signs of obvious change,
while undervaluing other types of landscape and ignoring entirely certain types,
such as industrial landscapes (#fairclough2002).
Successive iterations of Council of Europe recommendations moved away from this
representative bias toward recognizing the heritage value of the environment in
its entirety, through the interim step of
cultural landscape areas
(#coe1995)
and reaching its most comprehensive form in the European Landscape
Convention charter (#coe2000)
The charter states that landscape is
an area, as defined by people, whose
character is the result of the action and interaction of natural and/or
human factors
(#coe2000)
. There is much to unpack in this pithy definition. The term
area denotes a move away from thinking of cultural resources in
terms of point-based registers, the traditional method of defining heritage in
spatial terms (#fairclough2007) and toward what may be called an
area-based landscape conceptualisation. In order to do this we require: (1)
reliable and extensive multi-proxy palaeoenvironmental data (i.e. several lines
of evidence, see (#reitz2012) for an explanation of these
concepts), (2) reliable theories, methods and tools for processing,
interrogating, analysing and helping to interpret these data, and (3) suitable
tools and practices for presenting the visual representation of the plurality of
results which may result from 2. Although 3 is often the focus of technology
driven visualization projects (see (#nygren2014) for some Swedish
examples), the results risk, without sufficient weight in 1 and 2, becoming
simply narratives with little scientific value as opposed to narratives backed
by scientific data.
The second clause acknowledges that landscape has been argued to be a way of
seeing (cf. (#cosgrove1988)); a matter of perception and hence not
amenable to strict and objective criteria based on expert
analysis. Inherent in the definition is the notion that landscape cannot be
adequately described without accounting for those who experience it, and the
many cases of conflict and dispute over value and meaning of places with
heritage designations exhibit the degree to which perceptions of landscape can
differ (see, for example (#logan2009)
Although it would be misleading to see the ELC as panacea for all issues relating
to managing the historic environment, the framework has the potential to capture
some of the ambiguities and entanglements of landscape. As Bender notes, landscapes refuse to be disciplined. They
make a mockery of the oppositions that we create between time (History) and
space (Geography), or between nature (Science) and culture (Social
Anthropology) (Bender; quoted in ). Attempts at reconstructing landscape must consider this to a degree, and in
particular consider ways to address multiple perceptions and valuations of
landscape, as well as providing affordances for multiple – and contesting -
interpretations of landscape. Finally, inherent in this way of seeing landscape
is the key element of uncertainty arising from perceptions from multiple
perspectives, incomplete data sources and the degree of uncertainty ever-present
in the interpretations of complex systems such as palaeolandscapes.
Aspects of the ELC are clearly influenced by anthropocentric concepts of
landscape, but there has been debate for some years on the nature of the
natural, i.e. pre-human, landscapes, and their use as baselines for conservation
and re-wilding. Accepted concepts of woodland stability,
based on evidence from the fossil pollen record, have been challenged both
theoretically (e.g. (#vera2000)) and empirically as more lines of
evidence have been investigated (e.g. (#hodder2009); ). More often than not, the combination of
different proxies in multi-proxy analyses leads to a less clear picture, serving
to illustrate both the different strengths and weaknesses in the data sources
the true complexity of landscapes (e.g. (#buckland2005)
Collecting data on past landscapes: Can’t see the wood for the trees or can’t
see the trees for the wood?
In order to visualize a landscape at any point in the past, we require empirical
data on the nature of the environment at that point in time. In general,
archaeology has only access to snapshots of time, as made available through
sampling or excavation. These samples may contain traces of the past in the form
of organic remains (fossils), chemical or physical properties which in some way
reflect the nature of the environment in which they were deposited: proxy data
sources. For example, pollen from a tree may be blown into a lake and, as time
passes, subsequently be covered by more sediment (Figure
1). If sampled, the presence of this tree’s pollen will allow us to
deduce the presence of the particular tree species in the past environment of
the lake. By analysing and dating multiple sediment layers, the palynologist
(pollen analyst) can start to build a picture of changes in the prominence of
different species of plant in the landscape around the lake over time. The
proportion of pollen from different plants is, however, dependent on a large
number of factors (e.g. number and density of plants, plant age and health,
hydrology, human activity) and it is a far from simple task to create a
visualisation of the most probable landscape from these
data. By using multiple proxies, such as fossil insects and soil properties, we
can enhance the complexity of the picture beyond just the vegetation, but we can
never escape from a plurality of possible reconstructions.

The deposition of proxy environmental evidence (e.g. pollen, plant
macrofossils, insect remains) in a lake. To illustrate the variability of
representation, the size of the arrow indicates the relative amount of
pollen entering the lake from different vegetation types and distances. A
prehistoric settlement, here represented by a tent, elevated storage hut and
hearth, will most likely only be detectable by the presence of small amounts
of charcoal from burning. The actions of the settlement’s inhabitants,
however, may be indirectly represented through any impacts they had on the
surrounding landscape. Changes in the composition of the vegetation over
time will be represented by changes in the fossils deposited in the lake as
sediments accumulate. Reading this archive allows us to reconstruct
environmental changes over time, although transcribing this point source to
spatial variation is a complex task (see text).
Palaeoenvironmental landscape reconstruction relies on the ability of the
available evidence, and the methods available to analyse it, to represent a past
landscape. It is largely a question of using many detailed, and often indirect,
pieces of information to construct a whole. Variation in theory and methodology,
as well as implicit variability catered for in a methodology, will allow for
these pieces to be put together in practically innumerable combinations.
Deciding which combinations produce the more probable reconstructions is not
easy, and has led to disagreements between ecologists and palaeoecologists, and
even between different groups of palaeoecologists on how the evidence represents
different aspects of the landscape. This is particularly well illustrated by the
continuing debate on the nature of mid-Holocene (roughly 6000 years ago)
woodlands, regarded by many as representing the last woodlands truly unaffected
by human activity. Until recently, the majority of palynologists agreed on these
having been closed canopy woodland, and more or less continuous over much of
Europe (see e.g. (#mitchell2005)), an interpretation which has had
much influence on natural/pre-industrial baseline
orientated conservation strategies. The ecologist Franz Vera (2000) hypothesized
an alternative landscape history, with a more dynamic cycle of open and closed
forests driven by large grazing animals, and challenged the representivity of
the pollen data. The evidence from palaeoentomology (fossil beetle analyses) is,
however, inconclusive, and there is much debate on how the fossil remains of
woodland insects should be interpreted (#alexander2012). Problems
of representivity are common to the use of all proxy data sources, and methods
have been developed for mathematically translating raw data counts into broader
implications. In palynology (pollen analysis), there are algorithms for
translating fossil pollen data, through the use of modern calibration data, into
landscapes of probable vegetation (e.g. (#bunting2009); ). These methods are complex, reflecting the
difficulty of the task, and have the capacity to provide multiple outcomes with
an indication of their relative probability of being close to the truth.
However,
all models are wrong, some are
useful
(#box1987)
, and these reconstructions should be considered as tools
with which to explore and understand the past rather than devices for providing
definitive answers. Similarly, the BugsCEP software for fossil insect analysis
(#buckland2014) allows users to produce no less than 16
different reconstruction models from the same dataset (see Figure 2 for examples). These are exported by the
software as bar graphs and raw data, and used in combination with a detailed
understanding of the ecology of the species behind the reconstruction to
construct a narrative, often supported by the use of photographs of equivalent
modern environments.

Two of the 16 potential environmental reconstruction figures, for one
sample, produced by the BugsCEP fossil insect analysis software . The upper row of bars, A, uses only the
presence of species (essentially the alpha diversity) to calculate the
importance of different landscape elements in the sample's catchment. The
lower row, B, includes the numbers of individuals of each species, and in
this case suggests a higher prominence of grazing animals than A (seefor the context of this figure, where Roman
well deposits were used to interpret the contemporaneous landscape of
Sherwood Forest, UK, and compared with other sites). The choice of method is
up to the discretion of the user, and will depend on the context of the
samples, the quality of the data, and the purpose of the study. It would be
possible to produce a more realistic and widely understandable landscape
image from the results behind this figure, but this would most likely be at
the risk of losing the important details in the statistics.


Where did all the soil go?
From a heritage management perspective, climate change, and especially erosion,
is one of the most serious threats to cultural heritage today . Sites are simply disappearing as they are washed
into the sea or eroded from river banks globally The Scotland's Coastal
Heritage at Risk project (http://scharp.co.uk/) provides numerous examples of how coastal
erosion is destroying sites in Scotland, as well as providing a platform for
community engagement in the monitoring of these sites. (seefor a broad summary of the implications of climate
change for cultural heritage and (#hollesen2018) for a more up to
date overview of the situation in the Arctic). Erosion, and the resultant
deposition, are physical processes that have been active throughout the history
of the Earth. They are, however, an often neglected component of landscape
change over archaeological timescales, despite having significant implications
for changes in the value of land and water over time. There is evidence that
many areas of the world have experienced major episodes of sediment movement in
prehistory, most likely associated with cultural activities such as
deforestation, the introduction of slash and burn agriculture or the deep
cutting plough. As a consequence, many potential upland archaeological sites
have been lost and many lowland sites buried under metres of sediment.
Similarly, the geomorphology of landscapes has changed as sediments have been
eroded from higher areas and deposited in lowlands or water bodies. Using modern
day Digital Elevation Models (DEM’s) as the basis for landscape reconstructions
can therefore be misleading. If one is to understand the archaeology in its
contemporary landscape context, a more specific understanding of past sediment
movements is essential. At the time of writing, no significant models
incorporating sediment fluxes have been produced and integrated into
archaeological landscape models. However, we now have the technology to
facilitate this and are on the verge of creating the transdisciplinary sciences
necessary to integrate the full range of skills required for implementation.
Advances in the field of deposit modelling, most often used in the
context of heritage management and subsurface risk assessment, may also provide
key insights (see (#carey2018)
Visualisation platforms and landscape interpretation
The recent development and introduction of game engines and virtual reality
platforms in the cultural heritage sector presently allows archaeologists to
visualize accurate and multi-temporal interpretations of the past. The
introduction and diffusion of instruments for 3D acquisition such as laser
scanning or image-based 3D reconstruction techniques, together with the
development of more powerful and user-friendly geo-database systems, makes it
possible to integrate and display, at different scales, all the materials
retrieved during an investigation together with the information obtained by the
specialists described above (#wilhelmson2015). These systems allow
for a deeper understanding of the relationships and dynamics which characterized
and determined the development of ancient landscapes and sites by potentially
providing researchers and scholars with powerful simulation environments for
testing different hypotheses and interpretations of the past. Open access,
multi-proxy palaeoecology database systems, such as SEAD (http://www.sead.se; ) and Neotoma (http://www.neotomadb.org) provide sources from which data could be pulled into
landscape modelling software. Linking in this way would not only ensure a
connection between visualizations and source data, but could also facilitate
experimentation with multiple reconstructions whilst maintaining research
transparency. In fact, Neotoma already includes open code and toolsthat could be implemented in a GIS based model, and
SEAD has an API (Application programming interface) framework for providing data
to other systems, including Neotoma.
Since its introduction, 3D modelling has been perceived by many archaeologists as
an instrument through which researchers would be forced to formulate complex
interrogative questions, by providing the potential for multiple solutions to
the problem of reconstruction (#renfrew1997). During its early
years, three-dimensional visualization was considered as an opportunity for
simulating and discussing the past by looking at data from completely new
perspectives (#reilly1991)
(#forte1997). Despite these great expectations, the development of
this new approach in the archaeological sector was strongly limited by factors
such as low availability of computational resources, and lack of knowledge on
how to apply these new instruments to more traditional field practices.
Consequently, three-dimensional simulation environments were primarily adopted
for communicating with the general public. Museums, more than other
institutions, have initiated numerous experimental programs where different
typologies of technologies have been tested and evaluated (see https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/v-mustnet-how-museums-will-look-future
). The Ename 974A project represents a pioneering example, having
developed an on-site virtual reality installation called TimeScope in 1997. This
system allowed visitors to obtain an idea of the past appearance of a
Benedictine abbey and an early medieval fortress located in Ename, Belgium by
superimposing multiple 3D interpretations of the archaeological structures on
top of the building foundations visible on site (#pletinckx2000)
The diffusion of a three-dimensional visual approach in support of archaeological
practice and interpretation is still at an early stage. However, the exponential
dissemination and availability of powerful computational resources, as well as
new instruments for 3D recording and visualization, have allowed archaeologists
to start experiencing the use of three dimensional data to a larger scale.
Several research projects have started incorporating 3D modelling techniques, as
part of their archaeological practice, in order to experience the third
dimension for visualizing complexity rather than clarity
(#forte2012)
(#dellepiane2013)
(#dellunto2015)
(#berggren2015)
(#opitz2016)
Today virtual environments are used more and more as discussion spaces, where
interaction (Human-Human, Human-Machine) and interpretation are supported by
different datasets interlinked by a temporal and spatial structure. In the last
decade the European Community, under the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7
2007/2013) and currently under Horizon 2020 (2013/2020), has supported several
projects where 3D acquisition instruments, 3D models and 3D visualization
platforms have been developed and/or employed for the communication and study of
archaeological landscape and sites. Projects such as Arcland (http://www.arcland.eu/), 3DIcons (http://3dicons-project.eu/) and
Ariadne (http://www.ariadne-infrastructure.eu/) are among the many examples
where 3D visualizations have been discussed in relation to archaeological
practice.
An early example of best practice which goes in this direction can be recognized
in the The Giza project. Developed by Harvard University, this project focused
on linking traditional archives, created in the last two centuries by different
teams working on the Giza Plateau, with a realistic three dimensional
visualisation of the site (#dermanuelian2013). The system
functions as a large 3D repository where data produced as a result of different
field investigation campaigns are published in relation to the three dimensional
structures. Virtual characters were incorporated into the platform in order to
study the use of the space in antiquity. Moreover, by using this visualization
system, researchers were able to reconstruct the chronological deposition
sequence of the equipment retrieved in the burials as well as recognize a number
of previously unnamed tombs (#dermanuelian2013).
Another ground-breaking research project, where a game engine platform has been
developed and used to analyse the ancient landscape, is MayaArch3D (http://mayaarch3d.unm.edu/). In
the framework of this research activity, an online repository called QueryArch3D
was developed. This platform allows for the simulation of the relationship
between landscape and architecture by providing researchers with the capability
of accessing georeferenced maps, three dimensional models, and virtual
environments. This application makes it possible to visualize a multitude of
bi-dimensional as well as three-dimensional data concerning the eighth-century
Maya kingdom of Copan, Honduras. Through the system, users can link and
visualize together three-dimensional data at different levels of detail
(#agugiaro2014). Moreover, it is also possible to use the platform
to combine the analytical capabilities of Geographic Information Systems with a
powerful 3D visualization in order to perform real-time analyses by assembling
different types of dataset (#vonschwerin2013)
Conclusions and room for improvement
The reconstruction of past landscapes is complex, both theoretically and
practically, and the importance of reliable primary data and methods for
interpreting these cannot be overemphasized. How these reconstructions are
visualized has important implications for the perception of the past, not least
with respect to landscape management policies and in interdisciplinary
scientific discourse. The growth in the availability of palaeoenvironmental
data, coupled with more readily available topographic data and GIS modelling
techniques, is in the process of enabling a plethora of new approaches which may
use and misuse these data and reconstructions.
The possibility of merging and visualizing the results of different studies of
ancient landscapes exponentially increases the capacity of new platforms for
producing more realistic and complex scenarios of the past. Through the use of
3D model libraries, these systems have the potential to allow the rapid
visualization of complex ecosystems using the information provided by
environmental archaeologists (#huyzendveld2012)
including multiple variations originating from the same data.
Although there have been significant developments in the visualization of
different levels of certainty in urban or structural reconstructions (e.g. ), these have yet to have been successfully applied
to broader landscapes. However, the creation of new analysis and visualization
tools, as well as the capacity to import or link to more and more datasets, will
hopefully encourage the scientific community to consider these instruments as a
sandbox where all the information retrieved during a
landscape investigation can be visualized and interrogated at multiple levels
and in the same space. In this sandbox they will be able to discuss,
collaboratively and from multiple perspectives, new interpretations and push the
frontiers of integrated landscape archaeology forward. Nevertheless, the
relevance of visualizing woodland, a tree, or not a tree, for any point and
place in the past will always remain entirely dependent on the collection of
empirical data through field and laboratory based analyses.


Adams, J. Global
Climate Change: Every Cultural Site at Risk?. Heritage at Risk
(2015): 194-195.
Alexander, K. N. A. What do saproxylic (wood-decay) beetles really want?
Conservation should be based on practical observation rather than unstable
theory. In Rotherham, I. D., Handley, C., Agnoletti, M. and
Samojlik, T. (eds) Trees beyond the wood - an exploration of concepts of woods,
forests and trees. Wildtrack Publ., Sheffield (2012), pp. 33-46.
Agugiaro G. and
Remondino, F. 3D GIS for Cultural Heritage Sites: The
QueryArch3D Prototype. In S. Campana and F. Remondino (eds), 3D
surveying and modeling in archaeology and cultural heritage: Theory and best
practices. BAR international series, Oxford (2014): 145-150.
Agugiaro, G., Remondino,
F., Girardi, G., von Schwerin, J., Richards-Rissetto, H. and de Amicis, R.
Queryarch3D: Querying and visualising 3D models of a
Maya archaeological site in a Web-based interface, Geoinformatics
FCE CTU, 6 (2011): 10-17.
Beck, L. A. Regional approaches to
mortuary analysis. Plenum Press, New York (1995).
Berggren, Å, Dell'Unto N,
Forte M, Haddow S, Hodder I, Issavi J, Lercari N, Mazzuccato C, Mickel A and
Taylor J. Revisiting reflexive archaeology at Çatalhöyük:
integrating digital and 3D technologies at the trowel’s edge,
Antiquity, 89 (2015): 433-448.
Binford, L. R. A consideration of archaeological research design. American
antiquity, 29.4 (1964): 425-441.
Blankholm, H. P. Long-term research and cultural resource management strategies
in light of climate change and human impact, Arctic Anthropology,
46.1-2 (2009): 17-24.
Box, G. E. P. and Draper, N. R.
Empirical model-building and response surfaces. Wiley, Oxford (1987).
Bradley, R. Bridging the two cultures–commercial archaeology and the study of
prehistoric Britain. The Antiquaries Journal 86 (2006): 1-13.
Braje, T. J., Erlandson, J. M.,
Aikens, C. M., Beach, T., Fitzpatrick, S., Gonzalez, S., Kennett, D. J., Kirch,
P. V., Lee, G., Lightfoot, K. G., McClure, S. B., Panich, L. M., Roosevelt, A.
C., Schneider, T. D., Smith, B. and Zeder, M. A. An
Anthropocene without archaeology — Should we care, The SAA
Archaeological Record, 1 (2014): 26-29.
Buckland, P. C., Buckland,
P. I. and Hughes, D. Palaeoecological evidence for the Vera
hypothesis? In K. H. Hodder, J.M. Bullock, P. C. Buckland and K. J.
Kirby (eds), Large herbivores in the wildwood and modern naturalistic grazing
systems. English Nature Research Reports, No. 648 (2005), pp. 62-116.
Buckland, P. C., Buckland,
P. I., and Panagiotakopulu, E. Caught in a trap: landscape
and climate implications of the insect fauna from a Roman well in Sherwood
Forest. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences (2016):
1-16.
Buckland, P.I.
Buckland, P.C. BugsCEP Coleopteran Ecology Package.
IGBP PAGES/World Data Center for Paleoclimatology Data Contribution Series #
2006-116. NOAA/NCDC Paleoclimatology Program, Boulder CO, USA (2006). Available
at: https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-access/paleoclimatology-data/datasets/insect
and http://www.bugscep.com (accessed
26 August 2018).
Buckland, P. I. SEAD - The Strategic Environmental Archaeology Database.
Inter-linking multiproxy environmental data with archaeological
investigations and ecology. In G. Earl, T. Sly, A. Chrysanthi, P.
Murrieta-Flores, C. Papadopoulos, I. Romanowska and D. Wheatley (eds.), CAA2012,
Proceedings of the 40th Annual Conference of Computer Applications and
Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (CAA), Southampton, England, Amsterdam
(2013) pp. 320-331.
Buckland, P. I. The Bugs Coleopteran Ecology Package (BugsCEP) database: 1000
sites and half a million fossils later, Quaternary International,
341 (2014): 272-282.
Bunting, M. J. and
Middleton, R. Equifinality and uncertainty in the
interpretation of pollen data: the Multiple Scenario Approach to
reconstruction of past vegetation mosaics, The Holocene 19.5 (2009):
799-803.
Callieri M., Dell’Unto, N.,
Dellepiane, M., Scopigno, R., Soderberg, B. and Larsson, L. Documentation and interpretation of an archeological excavation: an
experience with dense stereo reconstruction tools. In VAST - The
11th International Symposium on Virtual Reality Archaeology and Cultural
Heritage, Eurographics (2011): 33–40.
Carey, C., Howard, A., Knight,
D., Corcoran, J. and Heathcote, J. (eds.), Deposit Modelling and Archaeology.
Historic England (2018).
Clark, J., Darlington, J. and
Fairclough, G. (eds.), Pathways to Europe's Landscape. EPCL, Heide (2003).
Cosgrove, D. and
Daniels, S. Introduction: Iconography and
Landscape. In D. Cosgrove and S. Daniels (eds.), The Iconography of
Landscape. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1988), pp. 1-10.
Council of Europe.
Recommendation R(95)9 of the Committee of Ministers to Member States on the
integrated conservation of cultural landscape areas as part of landscape
policies. Council of Europe, Strasbourg (1995).
Council of Europe. European
Landscape Convention. Council of Europe, Florence (2000).
Darvill, T. Heritage Landscape Sites
- an introduction to the work of the Group of Experts. ICOMOS-Deutschland
(1993), pp. 27-29.
Dellepiane M.,
Dell’Unto N., Callieri M., Lindgren S. and Scopigno R. Archeological excavation monitoring using dense stereo matching
techniques, Journal of Cultural Heritage, 14.3 (2013): 201-210.
Dell'Unto, N., Leander, A.
M., Ferdani, D., Dellepiane, M., Callieri, M. and Lindgren, S. Digital reconstruction and visualization in archaeology:
Case-study drawn from the work of the Swedish Pompeii Project. In
Digital Heritage International Congress (DigitalHeritage), 1 (2013):
621-628.
Dell'Unto, N., Landeschi,
G., Touati, A. M. L., Dellepiane, M., Callieri, M. and Ferdani, D. Experiencing Ancient Buildings from a 3D GIS Perspective: a
Case Drawn from the Swedish Pompeii Project. Journal of
Archaeological Method and Theory 23, 1 (2015): 73-94.
Der Manuelian, P. Giza 3D: Digital Archaeology and Scholarly Access to the Giza
Pyramids: The Giza Project at Harvard University. In Proceedings of
DigitalHeritage 2013 (Digital Heritage International Congress), Marseille,
France, October 28 - November 1, vol. 2 (2013): 727-734.
Díaz-Andreu, M.
and Mattioli, T., Archaeoacoustics of Rock Art:
Quantitative Approaches to the Acoustics and Soundscape of Rock Art.
In Proceedings of the Computer Applications in Archaeology Conference, CAA2015
(2015): 1049-1058.
Evans, J. G. Environmental archaeology
and the social order. Psychology Press (2003).
Fairclough, G. J. Archaeologists and the European Landscape Convention.
In G. J. FaircloughRippon (Eds.), Europe’s Cultural Landscape:
archaeologists and the management of change, EAC Occasional Paper no 2. Europae
Archaeologiae Consilium and English Heritage, Brussels and London (2002):25-37.
Fairclough, G. The Long Chain: Archaeology, historical landscape
characterization and time depth in the landscape. In G. Fairclough,
R. Harrison, J. Jameson and J. Schofield (Eds.), The Heritage Reader. Routledge,
Oxon (2008): 408-424.
Fairclough, G. and
Turner, S. Common Culture: The Archaeology of Landscape
Character in Europe. In D. Hicks and L. McAtackney (eds.),
Envisioning Landscape: Situations and Standpoints in Archaeology and Heritage.
Walnut Creek: Left Coast Press. (2007).
Foley, S.F., Gronenborn, D.,
Andreae, M. O., Kadereit, J. W., Esper, J., Scholz, D., Pöschl, U., Jacob, D.
E., Schöne, B. R., Schreg, R., Vött, A., Jordan, D., Lelieveld, J., Weller, C.
G., Alt, K. W., Gaudzinski-Windheuser, S., Bruhn, K., Tost, H., Sirocko, F., and
Crutzen, P. J. The Palaeoanthropocene–The beginnings of
anthropogenic environmental change, Anthropocene, 3
(2013):83-88.
Forte, M. 3D
archaeology: new perspectives and challenges — the example of
Çatalhöyük. Journal of Eastern Mediterranean Archaeology
Heritage Studies 2.1 (2014): 1-29.
Forte, M., Dell'Unto, N., Issavi,
J., Onsurez, L. and Lercari, N. 3D archaeology at
Çatalhöyük, International Journal of Heritage in the Digital Era,
1.3 (2012): 351-378.
Goring, S., Dawson, A.,
Simpson, G., Ram, K., Graham, R., Grimm, E., and Williams, J. Neotoma: A programmatic interface to the Neotoma
Paleoecological Database, Open Quaternary, 1.1 (2015).
Hicks, D., McAtackney, L. and
Fairclough, G. (eds.) Envisioning Landscape: Situations and
Standpoints in Archaeology and Heritage. Walnut Creek: Left Coast
Press (2015).
Hodder, K. H, Buckland, P. C.,
Kirby K. J. and Bullock, J.M. Can the pre-Neolithic provide
suitable models for re-wilding the landscape in Britain? British
Wildlife, 20.5 (2009): 4-15.
Hollesen, J., Callanan, M.,
Dawson, T., Fenger-Nielsen, R., Friesen, T. M., Jensen, A. M., Markham, A.,
Martens, V. V., Pitulko, V. V., Rockman, M. “Climate change and the
deteriorating archaeological and environmental archives of the Arctic”,
Antiquity, 92.363 (2018): 573-86.
Huyzendveld, A. H.,
Di Ioia, M., Ferdani, D., Palombini, A., Sanna, V., Zanni, S. and Pietroni, E.
The Virtual Museum of the Tiber Valley, Virtual
Archaeology Review 3.7 (2012): 97-101
Ingold, T. The
temporality of the landscape, World archaeology, 25.2 (1993):
152-174.
Johnson, M. Thinking about landscape. In C. Renfrew and P. Bahn (eds.),
Archaeology. The Key Concepts. Routledge, London (2005), pp. 156-159.
Johnson, M. H. On the nature of theoretical archaeology and archaeological theory.
Archaeological dialogues 13, no. 02 (2006): 117-132.
Kintigh, K. W., Altschul, J.
H., Kinzig, A. P., Limp, W. F., Michener, W. K., Sabloff, J. A., Hackett, E. J.,
Kohler, T. A., Ludäscher, B., and Lynch, C. A. Cultural
Dynamics, Deep Time, and Data: Planning Cyberinfrastructure Investments for
Archaeology. Advances in Archaeological Practice 3, 1
(2015):1-15.
Logan, W. and Reeves, K.
Introduction: Remembering places of pain and
shame. In W. Logan and K. Reeves (eds.), Places of Pain and Shame.
Routledge, Oxon (2009), pp. 1-14.
Lowe, J. J. and Walker, M. J.
Reconstructing quaternary environments. Routledge, (2015).
Makarow, M., Rodrigues-Pena,
A., Zic-Fuchs, M., and Caball, M. Landscape in a Changing World: Bridging
Divides, Integrating Disciplines, Serving Society. European Science Foundation.
(2010).
Massey, D. Landscape As A Provocation. Reflections on Moving Mountains,
Journal of Material Culture, 11.1 (2006): 33-48.
Mitchell, F.J.G. How open were European primaeval forests? Hypothesis testing
using palaeoecological data. Journal of Ecology, 93 (2005):
168-177.
Nygren, T., Foka, A. and
Buckland, P.I. The status quo of digital humanities in
Sweden: past, present and future of digital history. H-Soz-Kult
(2014)
OED 2016. The Oxford English Dictionary
(Online) [http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/224008?redirectedFrom=Visualization+#eid]
Oldfield, F. and
Steffen, W. Anthropogenic climate change and the nature of
Earth System science. The Anthropocene Review, 1.1 (2014):
70-75.
Opitz R., Johnson T. D.,
2016. Interpretation at the Controller’s Edge: Designing
Graphical User Interfaces for the Digital Publication of the Excavations at
Gabii (Italy). Open Archaeology, 2 (2016): 1–17.
Pletinckx, D., Callebaut,
D., Killebrew, A. E., Silberman, N. A. Virtual-Reality
Heritage Presentation at Ename. IEEE Multimedia, 7.2 (2000):
45-48.
Pocock, D. Sound
and the Geographer, Geography, (1989): 193-200.
Reilly, P. Towards a virtual Archaeology, CAA 18, Archeopress, Oxford, (1991):
133-139.
Reitz, E. and Shackley, M.
Environmental archaeology. Springer ScienceBusiness Media (2012).
Renfrew, C. Foreword. In M. ForteA. Silotti (eds.), Virtual Archaeology,
Thames and Hudson Ltd, London and Harry N. Abrams Inc., New York (1997), p. 7.
Simmons, I. G. Interpreting nature:
cultural constructions of the environment. Routledge (1993). (Reissued and
updated version published by Routledge in 2013).
Sugita, S. Theory
of quantitative reconstruction of vegetation II: all you need is
LOVE, The Holocene, 17.2 (2007): 243-257.
Tilley, C. A phenomenology of
landscape. Berg., Oxford. (1994).
Trigger, B. G. A History of
Archaeological Thought. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2006).
Tuan, Yi-Fu. Space and Place: The
Perspective of Experience. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN
(1977).
Tuan, Yi-Fu. Landscapes of Fear. Pantheon
Books, New York, NY (1979). (Reissued by Pantheon in 2013 with a new preface by
the author).
Vera, F. W. M. Grazing ecology and forest
history. Wallingford: CABI (2000).
Von Schwerin, J.,
Richards-Rissetto, H., Remondino, F. and Agugiaro, G. The
MayaArch3D Project: A 3D WebGIS for Analyzing Ancient Maya Architecture and
Landscapes at Copan, Honduras, Literary and Linguistic Computing,
28.4 (2013): 736-753.
Whitehouse, N.
J. and Smith, D. How fragmented was the British Holocene
wildwood? Perspectives on the Vera grazing debate from the fossil
beetle record, Quaternary Science Review, 29 (2010): 539-553.
Wilhelmson, H.
and Dell'Unto, N. Virtual taphonomy: A new method
integrating excavation and postprocessing in an archaeological
context, American journal of physical anthropology, 157.2 (2015):
305-321.
Williams, J. W., Grimm, E.
C., Blois, J. L., Charles, D. F., Davis, E. B., Goring, S. J., Graham, R. W.,
Smith, A. J., Anderson, M., Arroyo-Cabrales, J., Ashworth, A. C., Betancourt, J.
L., Bills, B. W., Booth, R. K., Buckland, P. I., Curry, B. B., Giesecke, T.,
Jackson, S. T., Latorre, C., Nichols, J., Purdum, T., Roth, R. E., Stryker, M.
and Takahara, H. The neotoma paleoecology database, a
multiproxy, international, community-curated data resource,
Quaternary Research, 89.1 (2018):156–177.
Yoffee, N. and Sherratt,
A. Archaeological theory: who sets the agenda? Cambridge University Press
(1993).

