Is this Article a Comic?
Jason Muir Helms
23 December 2015

Creator's Statement
Creating this article was one of the most challenging and exhilarating academic
projects I’ve ever taken part in. I had to learn how to do new things every day
(when I began, I’d never used Adobe Muse before). It also gave me the techniques and
knowledge to create a book-length digital monograph, Rhizcomics (forthcoming from the University of Michigan Press). In many
ways, this article was a test-run to teach me how to write the book.
I began with a script and a few sketches and ideas for interactive elements. I knew I
wanted to push the boundaries of what could be considered a comic (similar to Chris
Ware’s Building Stories or Richard McGuire’s Here, neither of which had been published when I wrote the
script). I also knew I wanted to engage various strands of DH thought. Typically,
when I think of DH I think of data and numbers. If I think of visuals at all, it’s
of graphs and other dry visualizations. However, I’ve also pushed students to
create compelling visualizations of information and arguments in my classes, and I
began to realize that drawing is another form of visualization.
The script led to a storyboard and then a few proof-of-concept web pages designed in
Adobe Edge Animate. My first experiment was with one of the panels of the Tapestry
section. It was the first time I had drawn using a stylus, so I wanted to get a feel
for the look of the finished product. Originally, I planned on including all sorts
of marginalia throughout the Tapestry section. That plan got scrapped pretty quickly
when I realized just how long it was going to take to draw with a stylus.
After getting feedback on the storyboard, script, and single page, I created the
article over a three-week period during the summer. It was fantastic to be able to
give the project such sustained focus. Each morning I drew new images (almost all of
them with pencil and ink on paper) and each afternoon I did the computer work:
scanning, fine-tuning and coloring in Photoshop and Illustrator, adding
interactivity in Edge Animate, and doing layout in Muse. Finally, I shared the
article with a few colleagues to get initial feedback, and I judiciously made just
about every change they recommended.
I ended up doing a lot less coding than I had foreseen. Edge Animate allows users
some space to compose and edit javascript, but Muse generally pushes its users away
from code entirely. I found this a strange way to work, as I was more comfortable
with Dreamweaver and with being able to edit the code I create. I have mixed
feelings about Muse: it’s simple, but it takes a great deal of control away from
designers.
I was very excited to play with paraphrase and block quotations in particular. When
reading scholarship, I often find block quotes to be jarring, pulling me away from
the author’s thread. On the other hand, I’m often frustrated by paraphrase,
wondering what the cited author really said. The digital comics
platform gave me a way to have my cake and eat it too, providing paraphrases in the
speech balloons and offering the full quotation to those who click on the balloons.
It also helped me avoid the awkwardness of academic prose appearing in speech
balloons. Speech balloons are meant to represent dialogue, and academic prose is
rarely that conversational.
I was surprised to discover the ways my arguments changed as the project coalesced.
The Deleuzian Comics section in particular was difficult to visualize initially, but
came together gradually and from many directions at once. The final product falls
short of what comics might be, but that was also always the plan. I’m hoping it
pushes someone to make something better (see the other articles in this issue for
more answers to the question What might comics become?).
I would like to thank the editors and reviewers at DHQ for their help in making this
article work. The reviewers offered insightful feedback throughout the process. I am
amazed that Anastasia Salter and Roger Whitson were able to propose this collection
and see it through to publication. It was a monster and couldn’t have been completed
without their careful guidance. Julia Flanders and John Walsh were incredibly
helpful and forgiving of the technological complexities of this article. It
certainly provided to be more work for them than most articles would be and I
sincerely appreciate their efforts. Amanda Booher, Joshua Hilst, and Ben and Meaghan
Helms read early versions of this article and their feedback proved invaluable.

Ball, Cheryl, and Ryan Moeller. Converging the ASS[umptions] between U and ME; Or How New
Media can Bridge a scholarly/creative Split in English Studies.
Computers and Composition Online (2008). Web.
January 29, 2014.
Beaty, Bart. Comics Versus Art. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2012.
Print.
Becker, Stephen D. Comic Art in America: A Social History of the Funnies, the
Political Cartoons, Magazine Humor, Sporting Cartoons, and Animated
Cartoons. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1959. Print.
Carrier, David. The Aesthetics of Comics. University Park: Pennsylvania State
University Press, 2000. Print.
Couperie, Pierre. Antecedents and Definition of the Comic Strip.
The Art of the Comic Strip. Eds. Walter Herdeg and
David Pascal. Zurich: The Graphis Press, 1972. 8-13. Print.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix
Guattari. What is Philosophy? New York: Columbia
University Press, 1994. Print.
Deleuze, Gilles. Difference and
Repetition. New York: Columbia University Press, 1994. Print.
Dosse, François. Gilles Deleuze &
Félix Guattari: Intersecting Lives. Tran. Deborah
Glassman. New York: Columbia University Press, 2010. Print.
Eisner, Will. Comics and Sequential Art: Principles and Practices from the Legendary
Cartoonist. New York: W.W. Norton, 2008. Print.
Groensteen, Thierry. The System of Comics. Trans. Bart Beaty and Nick
Nguyen. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2007. Print.
Harvey, Robert C. The Art of the Funnies : An Aesthetic History. Jackson, Miss.:
University Press of Mississippi, 1994. Print.
Jay, Martin. Cultural
Relativism and the Visual Turn.
Journal of Visual Culture 1.3 (2002): 267-78.
Print.
Jay, Martin. That
Visual Turn.
Journal of Visual Culture 1.1 (2002): 87-92.
Print.
Kunzle, David. History of the Comic Strip. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1973. Print.
Macleod, Katy, and Lin
Holdridge. Thinking through Art: Reflections on Art as
Research. New York: Routledge, 2006. Print.
McCloud, Scott. Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art. New York: HarperPerennial,
1994. Print.
Meskin, Aaron. Defining Comics?
The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 65.4
(2007): 369-79. Print.

The Ontology of Comics.
The Art of Comics: A Philosophical Approach. Eds.
Aaron Meskin and Roy T. Cook. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012. Print.
Mitchell, W. J. T. Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual
Representation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.
Print.
Moulthrop, Stuart. After the Last Generation: Rethinking Scholarship in the Days
of Serious Play.
Proceedings of Digital Arts and Culture Conference
(2005): 208-15. Print.
Ramsay, Stephen. On Building.
Stephen Ramsay. January 11, 2011. Web. January 24,
2014 .
Ramsay, Stephen. Who's In and Who's Out.
Stephen Ramsay. January 8, 2011. Web. January 24,
2014 .
Sim, Dave. Cerebus, Volume 1. Kitchener, ON: Aardvark-Vanaheim, 1991.
Print.
Spiro, Lisa. This is Why we Fight: Defining the Values of the Digital
Humanities.
Debates in the Digital Humanities. Ed. Matthew K.
Gold. Minneapolis: University of Minnessota Press, 2012. Web. January 30,
2014
Sullivan, Graeme. Art Practice as Research: Inquiry in Visual Arts.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2010. Print.
Svensson, Patrik. Beyond the Big Tent.
Debates in the Digital Humanities. Ed. Matthew K.
Gold. Minneapolis: University of Minnessota Press, 2012. Web. January 30, 2014.
Ulmer, Gregory L. The Object of Post-Criticism.
The Anti-Aesthetic: Essays on Postmodern Culture.
Ed. Hal Foster. Port Townsend, WA: Bay Press, 1983. 83-110. Print.
Wesch, Michael. The
Machine is Us/ing Us. YouTube. 2007. Web. May 1, 2013 .

