Film and Video Analysis in the Digital Humanities –
               An Interdisciplinary Dialog
Manuel Burghardt
Adelheid Heftberger
Johannes Pause
Niels-Oliver Walkowski
Matthias Zeppelzauer
20 December 2020


1. The Infrastructural Perspective: GLAM Institutions and Film Archives
The computer-aided analysis of moving images is becoming an increasingly important
topic within the digital humanities and it has been an interdisciplinary field since
its beginnings: Computer science and media informatics, film and media studies as
well as film archives and documentation centers have developed their own, independent
approaches to the digital analysis of film. At the same time, however, several
bridges have already been built between the individual disciplines: In computer
science, for example, there has been research on automatic film and video analysis
for more than 20 years, but it is still carried out without any visible connection to
the field of film studies. Since the digital humanities have always been a place of
interdisciplinary encounter and exchange, it is not surprising that the discovery of
digital film studies (see Grant [2012]) as a combination and continuation of the
above-mentioned disciplinary traditions, has become a major topic in recent years.
This special issue on Digital Humanities & Film Studies:
Analyzing the Modalities of Moving Images aims to promote an
interdisciplinary dialog by presenting a variety of different articles from different
fields. In order to get this dialog started, this introduction will try to work out
the different disciplinary strands of computer-aided film and video analysis and to
interconnect them in terms of a common digital humanities perspective.
A first important strand can be found in the so-called GLAM (galleries, libraries,
archives, museums) institutions, with their close connection to information science.
Cultural heritage institutions traditionally consider it their mission to facilitate
the creation and dissemination of knowledge and works of art by providing access to
their collections. This not only means engaging with academics, but also connecting
with a wider community and addressing their diverse needs. In libraries, archives and
museums, systems had already been established over centuries to support information
retrieval in their collections, for instance bibliographies, finding aids, citation
systems and concordances. This information was also made available in publications,
thus linking the publishers, librarians, archivists and curators to the researchers.
Film archives lag considerably behind when it comes to actively facilitate sharing
their collections, but recent developments within the international film archiving
community show a growing interest in exploring alternative ways of providing access
to filmographic metadata, inventory information and contextual information
likewise.
The beginnings of the fundamental restructuring of knowledge and the academic world
can arguably be dated to 2003, when the National Science Foundation (NSF), the
American government organization tasked with promoting basic research across
disciplinary borders, commissioned a report, later colloquially named after then
chairman Dan Atkins (2003). In two subsequent reports from 2006 and 2007, published
by the NSF and the American Council of Learned Societies (ACLS), the vision of a new
cyberinfrastructure ... that supports peer-to-peer
collaboration and new modes of education based upon broad and open access to
leadership computing; data and information resources; online instruments and
observatories; and visualization and collaboration services was
conclusively defined and disseminated (#arden2007). Already in 2009, in
the pivotal Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0, Schnapp
and Presner asked for a reevaluation of the relation between scholars and GLAM
professionals and affirm that modern universities still tend to
separate scholarship from curation, a fact that is hardly deniable. The latter is
normally reduced to a secondary and supportive role, thus sending curators within
the museums, archives and libraries into exile
(#heftberger2014). If we understand curation as the
overarching process of taking care of the collection in various ways, it is probably
closer to how the tasks in GLAM institutions have changed over the last ten
years. 
GLAM institutions are typically interested in two types of digital humanities: On the
one hand, they themselves have a need for new technologies in order to be able to
analyze, enrich, index and make their holdings accessible. On the other hand, they
often act as consulting institutions for connected researchers to support them with
knowledge, infrastructure and technology (for a comprehensive discussion of this
topic, see Schaffner and Erway [2014]). It is,
however, still not clear where the personnel for the mentioned tasks could come from.
Are new digital humanities graduates a way to fill these positions? Is it better to
form tandems of humanities scholars and computer scientists, or even change archival
educational programs (see Heftberger [2018])?
Questions like these were openly discussed at a recent workshop (February 2020), held
at the German National Library in Frankfurt, which dealt with the broader question of
how cultural heritage institutions position themselves when it comes to digital
humanities.
Nowadays, data management, data wrangling, data mapping and data sharing have become
core elements of the daily work in archives, libraries or museums. As Julia Flanders
describes, most digital humanities work – as performed by
library staff, IT staff, and other para-academic staff who are not faculty – is
conceptualized according to one of the other models: hourly, by full-time
equivalent, or as an agenda of projects that granularizes and regulates the work
in quantifiable ways
(#flanders2012). According to Flanders, there is a tendency
to define assignments in the framework of digital humanities (e.g. databases, online
presentations, also perhaps long-term archiving) as projects and to outsource them to
third parties. Although such a procedure is understandable, a chance is being missed:
the opportunity to build in-house resources which would also enable engagement with
collection content alongside the digital infrastructure and information management
(see Heftberger [2018]: 20).
One core task in the film archive is film identification and data enrichment via
subject indexing, which is usually still done manually. In the meantime, it has
become possible to annotate video files, to provide them with keywords to the
precision of a frame, to annotate them with geographical data and to comment on them
in free text. Potentially digital collections can be mined for patterns and objects,
and research can take place at the level of content but also at the levels of
metadata generation and meaningful web presentations. In recent years, in addition to
an increasing tendency to aggregate metadata and inventory data (e.g. filmportal.de), it can also be observed that
the topic of Linked Open Data is becoming more important. In international working
groups (e.g. in the Cataloguing Commission of the FIAF), ontologies for film as well
as workflows for the use of identifiers from, for example, Wikidata are being
collaboratively developed, and their usage will hopefully gain momentum (see Heftberger and Duchesne [2020]). If  we look at how
processes of knowledge transformation in the twenty-first century can take place and
how they can be understood by means of computer technology, interpretation must
remain an important component of the discipline: What the
community can do with the results of a digital humanities project is, like art,
often outside what a creator or project team might have envisioned for it — and
this is where the interpretation becomes important for multivalent digital
humanities projects. What does it mean that a database has been structured in a
certain way? What are the larger consequences for one design over another? How
does a certain project push the boundaries of what we consider acceptable
digital humanities work? How can new analytical processes or methodologies be
applied in different contexts? These are subjective and interpretative
questions that we must openly discuss.
(#gibbs2011)
Institutions can usually identify relatively clearly which tasks are suitable to be
supported by software. Typically, subject indexing and visualizing collections online
are named by professionals. In addition to these continuous duties, there are a large
number of exciting sub-projects that could be worked on in collaboration with
scholars and/or artists, and which would offer tremendous added value for both
groups. Film collecting institutions bring their knowledge about analog material to
the table as well as a comprehensive knowledge of film titles in their holdings,
which are not digitally available yet. Their staff can assist with expertise in
digitization as well as opening up film collections by viewing and cataloging titles
which have not been widely disseminated yet. Thus, they can contribute to broaden a
so far narrow view on film history which too many times only focuses on iconic titles
and male directors. Even just looking into cast and credit roles and how they changed
over the course of time in different languages may change our perspective, for
example on the involvement of female editors (see Pearlman and Heftberger 2018).
Making more film titles available and connecting resources digitally via sharing
metadata and contextual information as well as visualizing their collections is a key
task for film archives nowadays. One good example would be the BFI Filmography, which
so far is a rare attempt to consider filmographic metadata research data for film
historians and film scholars (#pearlman2018)
2.The Computational Perspective: Multimedia Information Retrieval
Film scholars have a long tradition in the qualitative and quantitative analysis of
film and more recently video. The automatic and automatically assisted analysis of
filmic content has – compared to that – a rather short history. Due to the large
amounts of data produced by digitized film and video and the associated high
computing costs as well as the initially rare availability of digitized footage,
research on automatic film analysis could only slowly establish when first digital
media retrieval methods started to develop in the mid 1990s. Since then, we have
observed a tremendous development of automatic film and video analysis which was
fueled by breakthroughs in machine learning methodology (especially deep learning) as
well as in the availability of annotated training data. Today, automatic film and
video analysis has achieved a certain level of maturity and — as a result — is
applied more and more in the digital humanities. We describe the origins of automatic
film analysis in computer science and its rather young history in the following and
identify important future challenges for automatic film analysis in the context of
the digital humanities.
The research field associated with automatic film analysis is called Multimedia Information Retrieval (MMIR). MMIR has originally
evolved as a branch of Information Retrieval (IR) (for some early examples see Mooers [1950], Salton and
McGill [1983], van Rijsbergen [1997])
and has grown to a broad and independent field of research in recent years. In the
last two decades, the amount of available digital media data has increased
tremendously. In addition to textual information, image, audio and video data have
become omnipresent due to the availability of cheap capturing hardware, the
development of efficient compression and transmission techniques and the
establishment of large, publicly accessible databases and media platforms on the
Internet. Still, the access to these large amounts of multimedia data is rather
restricted, as media data are often lacking textual descriptions. Also, it is
difficult to derive semantically meaningful information from the content itself, for
instance the individual pixels of an image or the samples of an audio signal. 
This is exactly where MMIR comes into play. MMIR aims at making sense of the raw
media to make the media itself searchable by content (#lew2006).
Thereby, MMIR makes large media databases instantly searchable. This enables a
variety of useful applications, such as finding people and objects in images,
retrieving videos that show and explain certain activities, finding unusual events in
long-term video sequences, but also retrieving syntactic and semantic concepts from
films (#zaharieva2010) to support qualitative and quantitative studies
by film scholars and to open up large-scale film and video corpora for systematic
analyses. Research on MMIR goes back to the early 1990s (#grosky1994)
and has grown so broad today that it has become difficult to oversee the entire field
(#pouyanfar2018). The great diversity of media data has led to the
development of several MMIR research branches, such as Content-Based Image Retrieval
(CBIR), Content-Based Audio Retrieval (CBAR), and Content-Based Video Retrieval
(CBVR), which over time have become research areas that can stand for themselves.
Additionally, several cohesive modalities (e.g. video and its corresponding audio
track) can be combined in multimodal retrieval approaches to leverage complementary
information for more robust retrieval. Multimodal retrieval is often used synonymous
with multimedia information retrieval and is also sometimes referred to as MMIR in the literature. Multimodal retrieval can be defined
as follows: A multimedia information retrieval (MMIR) problem is
multimodal if it includes multiple input modalities, such as images, audio, 3D
data, textual and contextual information
(#baltrusaitis2018). Multimodal retrieval can be considered an
overarching branch of MMIR that combines and integrates methodology from different
modality-specific branches. In multimodal retrieval, basically arbitrary data sources
can be combined as long as they have a certain semantic relationship. Today's
approaches toward automatic film and video analysis integrate methodology of all of
the above-mentioned branches of MMIR. For this reason, they are briefly introduced in
the following.

2.1 Content-based image retrieval (CBIR)
CBIR focuses on the retrieval of images in an image archive or database from a
given query, which can be either textual or provided as an example image
(query-by-example). The first content-based retrieval systems came up in the 1990s
and included systems like QBIC (#flickner1995) and VIRAGE , which were able to query a multimedia database by
example images. Aside from finding similar images to a query, typical CBIR
problems are the retrieval of objects, concepts and scene propertiesas well as image classification . CBIR is thus strongly interlinked with the fields of
computer vision and machine learning. Research in CBIR focuses on the retrieval of
patterns from various types of images, including medical images, remote sensing
imagery and user-generated content (e.g. in personal photo collections and in
social media). Broad surveys on the field of CBIR are provided by Datta et al. (2008) and more recently by Zhou et al. (2017). Automatic film analysis makes
intensive use of content-based image analysis. Even though the study object are
films and videos, many visual analysis problems in film analysis (e.g. object
detection in movies (#fluckiger2019), visual composition analysis
(#mitrovic2001) and the recognition of shot size and shot type
(#zaharieva2010)) can be performed on individual images without
taking the temporal dimension into account.
2.2 Content-based video retrieval (CBVR)
Closely related to CBIR is Content-Based Video Retrieval (CBVR). Typical problems
in CBVR are the retrieval of similar videos to a query as well as temporal
segmentation of a video in shots and scenes (#cotsaces2006), action
and activity recognition (#cheng2015) event recognition , motion retrieval (#zeppelzauer2011a),
video summarization (#delmolino2016) and video browsing . Content-based video retrieval integrates many
techniques from CBIR and extends them with temporal analysis (e.g. motion analysis
or object tracking). As a first step in CBVR, the video stream is usually
partitioned into smaller units, such as key frames, shots and scenes . Next, information at the frame as well as the shot level
are extracted and aggregated for retrieval and classification. Typical types of
video data include sports videos, news videos and surveillance videos. Beyond
these types of motion images, there is a large corpus of literature on the
automatic analysis of movies, documentaries and archive film
(#zaharieva2010), which has developed in parallel to visual research
in the digital humanities. A frequent pattern that can be observed from the
literature is that a broad range of filmic concepts has been investigated already
in the computer science, such as film rhythm, tempo, style and narrative
structures (#adams2001)
(#adams2002)
(#choudhary2019) but with rather simplified definitions of these
concepts.
2.3 Content-based audio retrieval (CBAR)
CBAR has developed similarly to CBIR in the early 1990s. Pioneering work is
presented by Wold et al. (1996), with their
development of an audio retrieval system called Muscle
Fish that was able to automatically distinguish between different types
of sounds (see Pfeiffer et al. [1996]). Since
then, there has been rapid development in different directions, such as audio
segmentation, music information retrieval and environmental sound retrieval.
Furthermore, the analysis and recognition of speech, which has developed
separately, starting already in the 1950s, can be considered one sub-branch of
CBAR (#juang2005). Compared to the visual modality, the acoustic
modality is under-represented in automatic film analysis. One reason is that the
acoustic modality alone is often not sufficient for film analysis. Acoustic
information is, however, highly useful when combined with visual information in a
multimodal approach (#snoek2005). Information from soundtracks can
significantly help to classify film genre, scene types and film style . Furthermore, the analysis of the affective dimension
of film requires acoustic and visual clues (#soleymani2009).
Finally, film montage may exhibit correlated patterns between the acoustic and
visual track (#zeppelzauer2011b)
2.4 Concluding remarks on the field of multimedia information retrieval
(MMIR)
From the brief review of the field of MMIR, we can observe that a large body of
automatic analysis approaches exists that would (at least in theory) be applicable
to filmic content investigated by film scholars. Especially in the early years of
MMIR, however, these methods were not powerful enough to model the complex
semantic concepts investigated by film scholars. Today, automatic visual (and
audio-visual) analysis is well advanced. Developments in machine learning and
especially in deep learning in the last decade have made significant progress in
the extraction of information from audio-visual media and in modeling semantic
relationships. Certain problems which appeared unsolvable 15 years ago can now be
solved automatically with almost human-level performance (#he2015).
This has therefore changed the situation for the digital humanities fundamentally.
MMIR has reached a level of maturity that can provide a real added value for film
scholars and the digital humanities in general. Many previously unanswered
research questions from film scholars are waiting to be (re)investigated by the
support of automatic film and video analysis methods.

3. The Media Perspective: Digital Encounters in Film and Media Studies
Recapitulating the history of digital tools, methods and practices within film and
media studies is a particularly challenging task. Wherever the field has dealt with
this topic, reflections on the status of digital tools and technologies have often
superseded their use as a facilitator of research. The reason for this situation is
as simple as it is convincing: it is the very insight that the
medium is the message
(#mcluhan1964). Hence, we should not just consider technology a tool, a
means to an end that lies at the heart, at least of media studies.Despite the
controversy about McLuhan’s concept of media and the bold claim he derives
from it no one, today, denies the idea that a medium significantly and often
unnoticed shapes what it mediates. The decision, however, to make
technology, and thus digital media, a research object of epistemological, cultural
and sociological enquiry itself has also another consequence. It creates awareness
about the fact that common narratives about the purpose of a certain piece of
technology and actual usages of the same technology can be two very different things.
It therefore sensitizes to alleged misusages of technologies. These misusages often
exist in the margins of those approaches that are propagated by certain tool
ideologies and instigate their own techno-social configurations. The histories of
digital tool usage in film and media studies are thus entangled with different
perspectives on the contingent nature of digital technologies and different
understandings of scholarly engagement.

3.1 Notions of the digital and digital methodologies
Using the plural form in histories is more than just acknowledging the democratic
attitude that writing history enforces. It is a reaction to the fact that it even
lacks an agreement about the same temporal dimension when researchers of the field
try to systematize the history of the use of digital technologies in film and
media studies. In Germany, for instance, Julian Sittel
(2017) states that film studies lags behind when it comes to the adoption
of digital humanities methods, while Patrick Vonderau
(2017) suggests that digital humanities is the continuity of a certain
way to use digital technologies that has long been superseded by other usage
types. This claim is illustrated by an analysis of the use of digital technologies
in film and media studies that distinguishes three consecutive phases between 1985
and 2005: The first phase produced tools to manually annotate and segment movies.
The second phase introduced database-driven quantification of annotated and
classified units in moving images. The third phase gives testimony of a
repurposing of the goal of databases themselves. They now shift from facilitating
statistical analysis to becoming a metaphor and facilitator for the situational
and explorative organization of content of any kind in research in the logic of
the collage. Databases are more conceived of as an expression of an abstract
notion of media practice instead of just being a tool to query and count .
In Vonderau's perspective, digital humanities is just an attempt to perfect narrow
use of digital technology that was predominant in the second phase. It lacks a
broad theoretical framing for digital transformation and technology as such and
thus misses new emerging paradigms of technology use. In Sittel's line of
argument, however, digital humanities are the clear sign of a more fundamental
shift; a shift that reconfigures the entanglement between theory, technology and
research – with respect to the first paragraph the media/message relationship –
itself and that, accordingly, cannot be integrated into film and media studies
appropriately. Claims such as those about the end of
theory
(#anderson2008)
(#hey2009) come to mind here. In summary, different notions of
technology instigate different historical narratives as well as different
methodological portfolios and needs. Each of these configurations are,
furthermore, linked to struggles for disciplinary autonomy but also to debates
about the internal structure of the field itself. This is most obvious when
Vonderau declares that actually the main object of film studies – the analysis of
movies – mostly disappeared in film studies with the arrival of digital
technologies, while Chavéz-Heras (2012)
announces that now, with digital tools, film analysis is reborn.
Such media-reflexive preoccupations have caused a lot of alienation between film
and media studies on the one hand and digital humanities on the other.It is
important to mention that in Europe this tension is stronger due to the fact
that in the US there has been branch of digital humanities that for long came
out of media studies and related fields (#svensson2010)
It would, however, be misleading if digital humanities just considered it an
internal issue of film and media studies. In fact, the digital humanities have
cultivated their own version of the above-mentioned tension, a tension that
recently created a schism within in the field itself. Since 2014, concepts such as
the post-digital humanities (#berry2014) or the critical digital
humanities (#grimshaw2018)
(#dobson2019) emerged within debates on digital humanities. The
former relates to the methodological inconsistencies behind the term digital
methods, while the latter stresses cultural conditions and impacts of algorithmic
meaning making processes. In opposition to these branches, in 2019, the
computational humanities research community spun off the field of digital
humanities, preceeded by debates that digital humanities had lost its core –
humanities computing – and that rather techie topics are not sufficiently
represented (#elwert2019)
3.2 Entanglements with the Digital and Post-Digital Humanities
This example is just the entertaining expression of an open space of entanglements
between digital technologies and doing research. In film and media studies these
include approaches such as artistic research
(#ruszev2018)
(#drucker2009)
(#casey2014)
(#baxter2017)
(#ferguson2015)
(#ferguson2017) and
videographic criticism
(#erlend2012)
(#keathley2019). The case of videographic criticism or the
video-essay, as it is sometimes called, is especially interesting
because it demonstrates how an object of research becomes the means of analysis
itself. It investigates movies by producing short movies and follows the media
reflexive idea that it might be best to represent facts of a certain modality
within that same modality. Although not computational in a strict digital
humanities sense, the video essay clearly is interpreted as a product of digital
technologies and an established method of film studies research (#mcwhirter2015).
Together with the above-mentioned dispute about the obsolescence or the revival of
the analysis of movies, the whole episode demonstrates very well that questions
raised by digital technologies are not just questions of new methods, and even
less questions of computational or statistical methods. They are, with similar
importance, questions about the changing status of research objects within a
changing, partially digital, environment. Accordingly, the challenge is not just
to define better or new methods, but also to develop a new sense of research
objects and research ecologies – all at the same time.
With this in mind, it is necessary to critically re-approach the notion that film
and media studies lag behind. The holistic angle on digital research that not only
considers new methods for known objects but also new cultural embeddings for known
as well as unknown objects, suggests another kind of endeavor. In this respect it
is a meaningful observation that in the history of digital humanities, fields with
clearly definable and established research entities – the edition, the textual
source and the artifact among others – were the most influential. It goes without
saying that the analysis of our partially digital environment and its objects
enforces to also apply digital humanities methods in a stricter sense of the term
and cannot be carried out comprehensively without them. In consequence, film and
media studies researchers that might not have welcomed these methods, due to
methodological reasons, in the first place are, nevertheless, beginning to open up
as has been mentioned before. The challenge, both for the digital humanities and
for film and media studies, remains to integrate perspectives of method, object
and ecology without creating a hierarchy among them; be it methods for the digital
humanities or objects and ecology for film and media studies.
It was a striking feature of Vonderau’s periodization that it ended around 2005,
which is more or less the same time in which the digital humanities began to
aspire. Both histories, the one that ended in the article's narrative and the one
that started with a companion, were motivated by the intent to separate one
research field from the other. The first history tried to show that the newly
emerging DH was in some sense always already part of the established field of film
and media studies. The second history presupposes that only by creating a new
field, the old will actually become the new. Comparing the history of digital
humanities methods in film and media studies with the history of film and media
studies topics in the digital humanities clearly shows that both lines of
arguments get it wrong, because in the growing number of encounters between film
and media studies and digital humanities, a new reality emerges that is both
post-humanistic and post-digital (#cramer2014)
Certainly, film and media studies have to engage more profoundly with the
methodological part of statistical and algorithmic approaches. This has slowly
begun to happen throughout the last years, as projects such as the large-scale
video analytics project (#kuhn2015), activities of the scientific
networks Digital Cinema Studieshttps://www.digitalcinemastudies.com or New Directions in Film
Historiographyhttps://www.uni-marburg.de/en/fb09/institutes/media-studies/research/research-projects/digitalfilmhistoriography
or projects like FilmColors (#fluckiger2017) and
Kinepoeticshttp://www.cinepoetics.fu-berlin.de/en/index.html suggest. At
the same time, it appears to be equally important for the digital humanities to
reflect on their rather broad conception of technology, in order to continue to
make substantial contributions to the reconfiguration of research by digital
technologies. A fuzzy reference to the big tent
(#terras2013)
(#svensson2016)

4. Toward an Integrated Perspective: Digital Film Studies and Digital
Humanities
In this section we bring together the individual disciplinary perspectives on digital
film studies in an integrated perspective within the digital humanities. The three
disciplinary perspectives of (1) GLAMs and archives, (2) computer science, and (3)
film and media studies align very well with the three sub-areas of Digital Humanities
as identified by Roth (2019): the digitized humanities,
the numerical humanities and humanities of the digital. In the following, we
illustrate the different variants of digital film studies with respect to the three
sub-areas of digital humanities by means of concrete examples. We also use this basic
classification to introduce the eight research projects and studies that are part of
this special issue.

4.1 Digitized humanities
This branch of DH is mostly concerned with the digitization of cultural artifacts.
This also includes the modeling of analog artifacts, i.e. the formal
representation of a cultural object. This formalization is an important
prerequisite for digital preservation and dissemination strategies, but also for
computational analyses of the material. For the formal representation of film, the
fundamental question is: how can we model a time-based and multimodal medium such
as film to be represented in discrete categories? As this is obviously a demanding
and complex task, it is important for scholars to be clear in advance – i.e.
before the actual modeling – about what they want to investigate: Are setting and
scene boundaries relevant for later analyses? Are they interested in
constellations of characters or the use of leitmotifs? Or do they want to take a
closer look at the dialog level? Due to the modeling effort involved, it is hardly
possible in practice to model everything pro forma, so a prior research question
is indispensable for the digitization and modeling of film and video.
As a consequence, it is rather challenging to create film and video resources that
can be reused by a variety of scholars, as the research questions (and modeling
implications, cf. Unsworth [2002]) vary widely
and as there are hardly any established annotation standards as known for other
types of media, for instance the Text Encoding
Initiative (TEI) or the Music Encoding
Initiative (MEI).Note that there have been first steps toward
establishing a Film Encoding Initiative (FEI) that
is based on the MEI: https://github.com/cemfi/FEI. However, this format does not seem to
be as established as TEI and MEI. Further challenges are raised by born
digital videos, for example YouTube videos or Twitch.tv streams, as specific
concepts for offline storage and potential long-term preservation are needed that
lead to open copyright issues and new requirements for digital infrastructure. In
this special issue, Eva Hielscher contributes to the topic of modeling and
representing films by presenting an extensive case study on video annotation for a
corpus of City Symphonies in her article titled The
Phenomenon of Interwar City Symphonies: A Combined Methodology of Digital Tools
and Traditional Film Analysis Methods to Study Visual Motifs and Structural
Patterns of Experimental-Documentary City Films.http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/editorial/000495/000495.html Another article in this special issue is on Matching Computational Analysis and Human Experience. Performative Arts and
the Digital Humanities.http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/editorial/000496/000496.html Here, Jan-Hendrik
Bakels et al. investigate the combination and mediation of experience-based and
data-driven analytical procedures in film studies. They transfer common film
analytical vocabulary into a machine-readable ontology to set up a systematic
annotation routine for films that can be visualized and queried.
Digitization of films and videos is also important for film heritage institutions,
as it helps to collect filmographic information from diverse sources by means of
specialized search functions, OCR or image recognition among others. This can also
support digital archives with mining their objects, for example finding
certain subjects/topics/people etc. Therefore, archives are excellent agents for
advancing the standardization of filmographic metadata, for instance by
benefitting from experiences with metadata standards such as EN 15907 (see Heftberger [2014]: 143). Another key
task here is the presentation of collections (or parts thereof) online in an
appealing, sensible and effective way. Institutions are fully aware that building
good interfaces is critical, but there seem to be many obstacles still in their
way. Insufficient financial resources might be one of those obstacles, being stuck
in building traditional entry points to collections may be another one. Masson et
al. provide a deep and comprehensive discussion of traditional and new paradigms
in this area in their article titled Exploring Digitised
Moving Image Collections: The SEMIA Project, Visual Analysis and the Turn to
Abstraction.http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/editorial/000497/000497.html Additionally, they are able to
substantiate this discussion by introducing the SEMIA platform, a convincing
example for how adequate interfaces might be designed.
In the past film archives, for the most part, differentiated between technical
expertise and work with content. However, a greater permeability between the areas
of responsibility is required in the future in order to comply with the
abovementioned challenges. It is already the case that many tasks are no longer
addressable by traditional roles. Digital data management, for instance, cannot be
restricted to just one area of material (e.g. films, photos or documents) and
metadata must be managed across the boundaries of collections in order to use
technical infrastructures and personnel resources in the best possible way among
other reasons. The strategy must therefore be twofold in the future: Teaming up
with researchers and artists as well as staffing their places with technically
savvy people who at the same time understand archival objects and are interested
in exhibition. Digital humanities as digitized humanities have organized around
such entanglements for years and may, therefor, provide valuable points of
reference for the field of digital film studies.
4.2 Numerical humanities
This second category is oftentimes also referred to as computational
humanities, highlighting the aspect of empirical analyses by means of
statistical procedures and machine learning techniques. In recent years, we have
seen a gradual extension of the established formal-stylistic analyses
(#tsivian2009), which mostly relied on the lengths and frequencies
of shots within a movie. Going well beyond shot
lengths
(#burghardt2016), a whole series of studies have been carried out
recently, for example to examine the color dimension (#burghardt2017)
(#fluckiger2017)
(#pause2018)
(#pause)
(#holobut2016). Another branch of work in this category can be found
in the area of visual analytics (#burghardt2018)
(#hoyt2014)
(#kurzhals2016), as visualizations can greatly facilitate the
analysis of visual time-based media such as film and video .
This special issue features two numerical humanities studies that investigate the
textual dimension of series and movies. In their article on The Stylometry of Film Dialogue: Pros and Pitfalls,http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/editorial/000498/000498.html Agata Hołobut and Jan Rybicki analyze 300 film dialogs by means of
stylometry and sentiment analysis to detect patterns of similarity and difference
between screenwriters and/or a priori IMDB-defined genres. Joanna Byszuk goes in a
similar direction with her article called The Voices of
Doctor Who – How Stylometry Can be Useful in Revealing New Information About TV
Series.http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/editorial/000499/000499.html More concretely, she uses stylometry
to examine the changes driving the development of the "Doctor Who" series from a
character-oriented to a showrunner-oriented series.
As part of the numerical humanities, deep learning approaches are also
increasingly being used in the sense of deep watching
(#howanitz2019)
(#arnold2019), in order to automatically segment films and identify
objects or people. In this special issue, Barbara Flückiger and Gaudenz Halter
contribute an article on Methods and Advanced Tools for the
Analysis of Film Colors in Digital Humanities,http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/editorial/000500/000500.html which provides an excellent example for numerical humanities, showcasing
a sophisticated deep learning approach to investigate color usage in film. Another
deep learning example is provided in the article Automated
Visual Content Analysis for Film Studies: Current Status and Challenges,http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/editorial/000518/000518.html by Ralph Ewerth et al. The authors provide a thorough
survey of approaches and tools for automated video analysis to support
quantitative and qualitative analysis in film studies.
For digital film studies, the digital humanities as numerical humanities mostly
represent methods that try to automate the identification of established entities
and units within film studies research. By doing so, they mimic analytical methods
of the field, but on a much larger scale than would be possible by means of
qualitative analyses of – typically – just a few films. In recent time, however,
there are also new approaches that aim at a semi-automatic and, thus, more
interactive analysis which seem to prioritize exploration instead of extraction.
This re-evaluation of priorities may well open-up the perspective for
contributions to a more diverse understanding of numerical and computational
approaches to the study of films.
4.3 Humanities of the digital
This category describes humanities scholars’ broader interest for the inclusion of
phenomena that emerge from the digital culture. In the field of film
studies, this might, for instance, entail the abovementioned investigation of born
digital videos, which very often also brings with it a dimension of mass
communication and thus big data: either, because a multitude of videos are
available, or because there is additional mass communication channel available,
e.g. in the form of comments about a video (reception aesthetics). It also
includes an examination of digital aesthetics as well as of new forms of
production and reception in an increasingly digitized, post-cinema film culture.
Such changes inevitably raise theoretical questions that, at the same time, are
necessarily linked to new research practices. Due to the sheer volume of digitally
available material, a serious opening of the humanities towards digital culture
obviously requires an increased integration of digital methods into scholarly
practices as well.
From the perspective of film studies, the central challenge humanities of the
digital imposes, is the need for a holistic instead of a pragmatic integration of
digital methods, not the least because these methods have become methods of
production and analysis (film essay) at the same time. A central task in this
context is to reflect on the changing relationship between research instrument and
research subject, to bring together quantitative and qualitative methods, to find
ways to mediate between metrization and interpretation. It is important to
demonstrate that approaches of data-driven research can be particularly productive
in the field of film and media studies when they are conceived of as tools within
the framework of a diverse practice (cf. Antonijevic [2015]) or mixed methods (#pereira2019). In
this setup, digital methods are part of a practice, but not its overarching theme.
One example for such a more praxeologically oriented approach to the integration
of digital methods in film studies has been recently systematized under the term
scalable viewing
(#burghardt2018)
(#pause2020)
In this context, the Humanities of the Digital provide theoretical
foundations for new notions of the digital that have the potential to make digital
methods more accessible for film studies research. Such notions root deeper in the
tradition of the humanities, while at the same time highlighting the necessity and
added value of algorithmic strategies. In this special issue, Sarah-Mai Dang
contributes to this third sub-field of digital humanities by presenting an article
on Unknowable Facts and Digital Databases: Reflections on the
Women Film Pioneers Project and Women in Film History.http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/editorial/000528/000528.html More concretely, she discusses the epistemological function and the
scholarly implications of databases in film and media studies.

5. Conclusions
The challenges that have been outlined throughout the entire editorial call for a
joint interdisciplinary effort of computer scientists, film studies scholars and
archivists and represent an exciting research agenda for the coming years. While it
seems to be the case that each of the digital humanities sub-areas gravitates around
one particular discipline – namely digitization with GLAM,
numerical with computer science and digital with film
and media studies – it would be dangerous to just equate them with each other. Tools
that are used for video criticism often build upon the same statistical and machine
learning methods that are used in the numerical humanities, and without doubt, both
GLAM and computer science are evaluating the broad field of new research objects in
digital media. The horizon, however, that is particularly addressed by the digital
humanities, is one in which one discipline is not just informed by the others but in
which each discipline contributes on all levels to a shared space of insights,
developments and practices.
The FilmColors (#fluckiger2017) project, for example, started from the
insight, that approaches for the extraction of dominant colors, common in computer
science have significant drawbacks. Based on this insight, the project defined a new
approach that makes use of cultural concepts about how spectators process the
kinematic image. It, however, did not just provide these insights to computer
scientists, it also implemented a new machine learning pipeline for colorimetric
analysis that is immediately available to the field of computer science for further
optimization. The project, moreover, introduced innovations to the presentation of
colorimetric information on the user interface level that are certainly inspiring for
the aforementioned issues in the GLAM sector. It is precisely these overlaps out of
which film and moving image analysis inside the umbrella of digital humanities might
emerge as a field of its own.


Adams, B., Dorai, C., and Venkatesh,
S. Automated film rhythm extraction for scene analysis.
ICME 2001: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Multimedia and Expo (2001): 1056-1059.
Adams, B., Dorai, C., and Venkatesh,
S. Formulating Film Tempo. The Computational Media Aesthetics
Methodology in Practice. In C Dorai and S Venkatesh (eds.), Media Computing: Computational Media Aesthetics. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA (2002): 57-84.
Atkins, D. Revolutionizing Science and Engineering through Cyberinfrastructure. Report of
the National Science Foundation Blue-Ribbon Advisory Panel on
Cyberinfrastructure, US National Science Foundation (2003). [ http://www.nsf.gov/cise/sci/reports/atkins.pdf]
Anderson, C. The
End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific Method Obsolete.
Wired 16.7 (2008).
Antonijevic, S. Amongst Digital Humanists. An ethnographic study of digital
knowledge production. Palgrave Macmillan, London (2015).
Arden, L. Cyberinfrastructure Vision for 21st Century Discovery. National Science Foundation. US National Science Foundation (2007). [https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf0728/nsf0728.pdf]

Arnold, T. and Tilton, L.
Distant Viewing: Analyzing Large Visual Corpora.
Digital Scholarship in the Humanities (2019).
Baltrusaitis, T.,
Ahuja, C., and Morency, L.-P. Multimodal machine learning: A
survey and taxonomy.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern AnalysisMachine
Intelligence 41.2 (2018): 423-443.
Baxter, M., Khitrova, D., and
Tsivian, Y. Exploring Cutting Structure in Film, with
Applications to the Films of D. W. Griffith, Mack Sennett, and Charlie
Chaplin.
Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 32.1
(2017).
Bednarek, M. Language and Television Series: A Linguistic Approach to TV Dialogue.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2018).
Berry, D. M. Post-Digital Humanities: Computation and Cultural Critique in the Arts and
Humanities.
Educause 49.3 (2014): 22-26. [ http://www.educause.edu].
Böhme, S., Nohr, R. F., and Wiemer,
S. Sortieren, Sammeln, Suchen, Spielen. Die Datenbank als
mediale Praxis. LIT Verlag, Münster (2012).
Burghardt, M., Kao, M., and
Wolff, C. Beyond Shot Lengths. Using Language Data and Color
Information as Additional Parameters for Quantitative Movie Analysis.
Book of Abstracts of the International Digital Humanities
Conference (DH) (2016).
Burghardt, M., Hafner, K.,
Edel, L., Kenaan, S., and Wolff, C. An Information System for
the Analysis of Color Distributions in MovieBarcodes. Proceedings of the
15th International Symposium of Information Science (ISI) (2017).
Burghardt, M., Kao, M., and
Walkowski, N.-O. Scalable MovieBarcodes. An Exploratory
Interface for the Analysis of Movies.
IEEE Vis4DH Workshop (2018).
Casey, M., and Williams, M.
ACTION (Audio-Visual Cinematic Toolbox for Interaction,
Organization, and Navigation): An Open-Source Python Platform. White Paper
HD-51394-11 (2014). [https://securegrants.neh.gov/publicquery/main.aspx?f=1gn=HD-51394-11].
Chávez-Heras, D. The Malleable Computer: Software and the Study of the Moving
Image.
Frames Cinema Journal 1.1 (2012). [https://framescinemajournal.com/article/the-malleable-computer/].
Cheng, G., Wan, Y., Saudagar, A. N.,
Namuduri, K., and Buckles, B. P. Advances in human action
recognition: A survey. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1501.05964 (2015).
Choudhary, P., Goel, N., and
Saini, M. A Multimedia Based Movie Style Model.
IEEE International Conference on MultimediaExpo Workshops
(ICMEW) (2019): 72-77. 
Cotsaces, C., Nikolaidis, N.,
and Pitas, I. Video shot detection and condensed representation.
A review.
IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 23.2 (2006):
28-37.
Cramer, F. What Is
Post-Digital?.
A Peer-Reviewed Journal About Post Digital Research
(2014). [https://aprja.net/article/view/116068]
Datta, R., Joshi, D., Li, J., and
Wang, J. Z. Image retrieval: Ideas, influences, and trends of
the new age.
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 40.2 (2008): 5.
Del Molino, A. G., Tan, C.,
Lim, J.-H., and Tan, A.-H. Summarization of egocentric videos: A
comprehensive survey.
IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems 47.1 (2016):
65-76.
Dobson, J. Critical
Digital Humanities: The Search for a Methodology. University of Illinois
Press, Urbana (2019). [https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5406/j.ctvfjd0mf].
Drucker, J. SpecLab: Digital Aesthetics and Projects in Speculative Computing.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago (2009).
Druzhkov, P. and
Kustikova, V. A survey of deep learning methods and software
tools for image classification and object detection.
Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis 26.1 (2016):
9-15.
Elwert, F. The Sudden
but Consequential Rise of the Computational Humanities. Billet.
A Belter's Life (Blog) (2019). [https://belter.hypotheses.org/64].
Erlend, L. The Video
Essay: The Future of Academic Film and Television Criticism?
Frames Cinema Journal 1 (2012). [https://framescinemajournal.com/article/the-video-essay-the-future/]
Ewerth, R., Mühling, M.,
Stadelmann, T., Gllavata, J., Grauer, M., and Freisleben, B. Videana: a software toolkit for scientific film studies. In M. Ross, M.
Grauer, B. Freisleben (eds.), Digital Tools in Media Studies.
Analysis and Research. An Overview. Transcript, Bielefeld (2009): 101–116.
Ferguson, K. L. Volumetric Cinema.
Transition: Journal of Videographic Film and Moving Image
Studies 2 (2015).
Ferguson, K. L. Digital Surrealism: Visualizing Walt Disney Animation Studios.
Digital Humanities Quarterly 11.1 (2017). [http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/1/000276/000276.html].
Flanders, J. Time, Labor, and Alternate Careers. In M. K. Gold (ed.), Digital Humanities Knowledge Work. Debates in the Digital
Humanities. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (2012):
292-308.
Flickner, M., Sawhney, H.,
Niblack, W., Ashley, J., Qian Huang, Dom, B., Gorkani, M., Hafner, J., Lee, D.,
Petkovic, D., Steele, D., and Yanker, P. Query by image and
video content: The QBIC system.
Computer 28.9 (1995): 23-32.
Flückiger, B. A
Digital Humanities Approach to Film Colors.
The Moving Image: The Journal of the Association of Moving Image
Archivists 17.2 (2017): 71-94.
Flückiger, B. Cinematic worlds in color. Technology, aesthetics, analysis. In BITForum. Film techniques and technology: illusion, reality,
virtuality, innovation. Busan, South Korea (2019): 11-39.
Gibbs, F. Critical Discourse in the Digital Humanities.
Journal of Digital Humanities 1.1 (2011)
Grant, C. Film and
moving image studies: Re-born digital? Some participant
observations. Frames Cinema Journal 1.1
(2012).
Grimshaw, M. Towards a Manifesto for a Critical Digital Humanities: Critiquing the Extractive
Capitalism of Digital Society.
Palgrave Communications 4.1 (2018): 1-8.
Grosky, W. I. Multimedia information systems.
IEEE Multimedia 1.1 (1994): 12-24.
Gupta, A. and Jain, R. Visual information retrieval.
Communications of the ACM 40.5 (1997): 70-79.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J.
Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level
performance on imagenet classification.
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision (2015): 1026-1034.
Heftberger, A. Film archives and digital humanities - an impossible match? New job
descriptions and the challenges of the digital era.
MedieKultur: Journal of media and communication research
30.57 (2014): 135-153 [http://ojs.statsbiblioteket.dk/index.php/mediekultur/issue/view/2200
https://tidsskrift.dk/mediekultur/article/view/16487/17534].
Heftberger, A. Digital Humanities and Film Studies: Visualising Dziga Vertov's
Work. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2018).
Heftberger, A. The Current Landscape of Film Archiving and How Study Programs can
Contribute.
SYNOPTIQUE - An Online Journal of Film and Moving Image
Studies, Special Issue. The Current Landscape of Film
Archiving and How Study Programs can Contribute 6.1 (2018): 58-69. [http://synoptique.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/9-adelheid-heftberger-the-current-landscape-of-film-archiving-and-how-study-programs-can-contribute.pdf]
Heftberger, A. and
Duchesne, P. Cataloguing Practices in the Age of Linked Open
Data: Wikidata and Wikibase for Film Archives. International Federation of
Film Archives, Brussels, Belgium (2020). [https://www.fiafnet.org/pages/E-Resources/Cataloguing-Practices-Linked-Open-Data.html]
Hey, T., Tansley, S., and Tolle, K.
The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific
Discovery. Microsoft Research, Redmond (2009).
Hołobut, A., Rybicki, J., and
Woźniak, M. Stylometry on the Silver Screen: Authorial and
Translatorial Signals in Film Dialogue.
Book of Abstracts of the International Digital Humanities
Conference (DH) (2016).
Howanitz, G., Bermeitinger, B.,
Radisch, E., Sebastian G., Rehbein, M., and Handschuh, S. Deep
Watching - Towards New Methods of Analyzing Visual Media in Cultural
Studies.
Book of Abstracts of the International Digital Humanities
Conference (DH) (2019).
Hoyt, E., Ponot, K., and Roy, C. Visualizing and Analyzing the Hollywood Screenplay with
ScripThreads.
Digital Humanities Quarterly 8.4 (2014). [http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/4/000190/000190.html] 
Juang, B.-H. and Rabiner, L. R.
Automatic speech recognition - a brief history of the
technology development. Technical report. Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta Rutgers University and the University of California, Santa Barbara
(2005).
Keathley, C., Mittell, J.,
Grant, C., Faden, E. and Lee, K.B. The Videographic Essay:
Criticism in SoundImage. Caboose Books, Montréal (2019).
Kuhn, V., Craig, A., Simeone, M.,
Satheesan, S. P., and Marini, L. The VAT: Enhanced Video
Analysis.
Proceedings of the 2015 XSEDE Conference on Scientific
Advancements Enabled by Enhanced Cyberinfrastructure - XSEDE '15. Louis,
Missouri (2015): 1-4.
Kurzhals, K., John, M.,
Heimerl, F., Kuznecov, P., and Weiskopf, D. Visual Movie
Analytics.
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 18.11 (2016).
Lew, M. S., Sebe, N., Djeraba, C., and
Jain, R. Content-based multimedia information retrieval: State
of the art and challenges.
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and
Applications (TOMM) 2.1 (2006): 1-19.
Manovich, L. Visualizing Vertov.
Russian Journal of Communication 5.1 (2013): 44-55.
 
McLuhan, M. Understanding Media. The Extensions of Man. 1st ed. McGraw-Hill, New York
(1964).
McWhirter, A. Film Criticism, Film Scholarship and the Video Essay.
Screen 56.3 (2015): 369-377.
Mitrovic, D., Zeppelzauer, M.,
Zaharieva, M., and Breiteneder, C. Retrieval of Visual
Composition in Film.
Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on Image Analysis
for Multimedia Interactive Services. Delft (2001).
Mooers, C. N. The
theory of digital handling of non-numerical information and its implications to
machine economics.
Proceedings of the Association for Computing Machinery
Conference. National Science Foundation (2007).  [http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf0728/index.jsp?org=EEC]
Pause, J. and Walkowski, N.O.
Everything is Illuminated. Zur Numerischen Analyse von
Farbigkeit in Filmen.
Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften (2018).
Pause, J. and Walkowski, N.O.
Welten abnehmenden Lichts. Ein Multi-Scale Viewing des
Politthrillers im 21. Jahrhundert.
montage AV. Zeitschrift für Theorie und Geschichte
audiovisueller Kommunikation 29 (2020): 59.
Pause, J. and Walkowski,
N.O. Zombies, Conspiracies, and Esthetics in Crisis. A
computational engagement with film genre. In I. Ritzer (eds.), Media and Genre. Dialogues in Aesthetics and Cultural
Analysis. Cham (forthcoming)
Pearlman, K. and
Heftberger, A. Editorial: Recognising Women’s Work as Creative
Work. In A. Heftberger and K. Pearlman (eds.), Women
at the Editing Table: Revising Soviet Film History of the 1920s and 1930s.
Special Issue of Apparatus. Film, Media and Digital Cultures in
Central and Eastern Europe 6 (2018).

de sá Pereira, M. Mixed Methodological Digital
Humanities. In M. K. Gold and L. F. Klein (eds.), Debates in the
Digital Humanities 2019. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
(2019): 405-412.
Pfeiffer, S., Fischer, S., and
Effelsberg, W. Automatic audio content analysis.
Proceedings of the Forth ACM International Conference on
Multimedia '96. Boston, MA (1996).
Pouyanfar, S., Yang, Y.,
Chen, S.-C., Shyu, M.-L., and Iyengar, S. Multimedia big data
analytics: A survey.
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 51.1 (2018): 10.
van Rijsbergen, C. Information Retrieval. Butterworth-Heinemann, London
(1979).
Roth, C. Digital,
digitized, and numerical humanities.
Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 34.3 (2019):
616-632.  
Rui, Y., Huang, T. S., and Mehrotra, S.
Exploring video structure beyond the shots.
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Multimedia
Computing and Systems (1998): 237-240.
Ruszev, S. Rhythmic
Trajectories. Visualizing Cinematic Rhythm in Film Sequences. In
Heftberger, A. and Grgic, A. (eds.), Women Cutting Movies:
Editors from East and Central Europe. Special Issue of Apparatus. Film Media and Digital Cultures of Central and Eastern
Europe 7 (2018).
Salt, B. Statistical
Style Analysis of Motion Pictures.
Film Quarterly 28.1 (1974): 13-22.
Salt, B. Moving into
Pictures. More on Film History, Style, and Analysis. Starword Publishing,
London (2006).
Salton, G. and McGill, M.
Introduction to modern information retrieval.
McGraw-Hill, New York (1983).
Schaffner, J. and Erway,
R. Does Every Research Library Need a Digital Humanities
Center? OCLC Research, Dublin, Ohio (2014). [http://www.oclc.org/content/dam/research/publications/library/2014/oclcresearch-digital-humanities-center-2014.pdf]
Schöffmann, K., Hopfgartner,
F., Marques, O., Boeszoermenyi, L., and Jose, J. M. Video
browsing interfaces and applications: a review.
SPIE Reviews 1.1 (2010).
Sittel, J. Digital
Humanities in der Filmwissenschaft.
MEDIENwissenschaft: Rezensionen | Reviews 4 (2017): 472.
Snoek, C. G. and Worring, M.
Multimodal video indexing: A review of the
state-of-the-art.
Multimedia Tools and Applications 25.1 (2005):
5-35.
Soleymani, M., Chanel, G.,
Kierkels, J. J., and Pun, T. Affective characterization of movie
scenes based on content analysis and physiological changes.
International Journal of Semantic Computing 3.2 (2009): 235-254.
Svensson, P. The
Landscape of Digital Humanities.
Digital Humanities Quarterly 4.1 (2010). [http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/4/1/000080/000080.html]
Svensson, P. Big
Digital Humanities: Imagining a Meeting Place for the Humanities and the
Digital. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor (2016). 
Terras, M. Peering
Inside the Big Tent. In M. Terras, J. Nyhan and E. Vanhoutte (eds.),
Defining Digital Humanities, London (2013):
263-270. 
Tsivian, Y. Cinemetrics, Part of the Humanities' Cyberinfrastructure. In M. Ross, M.
Grauer and B. Freisleben (eds.), Digital Tools in Media
Studies. Bielefeld (2009): 93-100. 
Tzelepis, C., Ma, Z., Mezaris,
V., Ionescu, B., Kompatsiaris, I., Boato, G., Sebe, N., and Yan, S. Event-based media processing and analysis: A survey of the
literature.
Image and Vision Computing 53 (2016): 3-19.
Vonderau, P. Quantitative Werkzeuge. In M. Hagener and V. Pantenburg (eds.), Handbuch Filmanalyse. Wiesbaden (2017): 1-15.
Wold, T., Blum, D., and Wheaton, J.
Content-based classification, search, and retrieval of
audio.
IEEE Multimedia 3 (1996): 27-36.
Zaharieva, M., Zeppelzauer,
M., Mitrovic, D., and Breiteneder, C. Archive film
comparison.
International Journal of Multimedia Data Engineering and
Management 1.3 (2010): 41-56.
Zeppelzauer, M.,
Zaharieva, M., Mitrovi¢, D., and Breiteneder, C. Retrieval of
motion composition in Film.
Digital Creativity 22.4 (2011): 219-234.
Zeppelzauer, M.,
Mitrovic, D., and Breiteneder, C. Cross-modal analysis of
audio-visual film montage.
Proceedings of 20th International Conference on Computer
Communications and Networks (ICCCN) (2011): 1-6. 
Zhao, B., Feng, J., Wu, X., and Yan, S.
A survey on deep learning-based fine-grained object
classification and semantic segmentation.
International Journal of Automation and Computing 14.2
(2017): 119-135.
Zhou, W., Li, H., and Tian, Q. Recent advance in content-based image retrieval: A literature
survey. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1706.06064 (2017).

