Close Rereading: A review of Jessica Pressman, Digital Modernism: Making It New in New Media (Oxford:
                    Oxford UP, 2014)
Shawna Ross
26 May 2015

Jessica Pressman’s Digital Modernism: Making It New in New
Media is an innovative, indispensable, and far-ranging work that
contextualizes a compact canon of contemporary digital literature within the broader
twentieth-century modernist tradition of artistic engagement with new media. Bogged
down by a plodding scholarly proceduralism, the book’s conscientious tone nearly
muffles a series of lively readings of digital literature. Digital Modernism’s impressive interdisciplinarity, which combines
principles from a variety of new fields — New Media Studies,
New Modernist Studies, and New Criticism — is brought to bear on works by William
Poundstone, Young-Hae Change Heavy Industries (YHCHI), Erik Loyer, Talan Memmott,
Judd Morrissey, and Mark Z. Danielewski. Pressman argues that these works not only
contain immanent critiques of their
technocultural context
(#pressman2014)to see more clearly the world of print
(#pressman2014). Refashioning Marshall McLuhan, father of New
Media Studies, as a midcentury axis or conceptual medium capable of reaching
backward to modernism and forward to digital culture, Pressman achieves nothing less
than a new vision of the intellectual and artistic history of new media and
technology. What is at stake,
she boldly claims, is nothing short of
a better understanding of the significance of literary art, critical reading
practices, and humanistic culture in a our networked age
(#pressman2014). Due to Pressman’s fierce advocacy of close
reading, Digital Modernism’s conceptual eclecticism
does not impede the clarity of her vision, but it comes at the cost of a narrowness
in the scope of literary works she investigates — in ways she sometimes compensates
for and, at other times, does not.
Digital Modernism’s opening salvo, Mark Wollaeger and
Kevin J. Dettmar’s remarkably sassy Series Editors’ Foreword, is structured as a
FAQ. Anticipating knee-jerk rejections of Pressman’s choice of modernism rather than
postmodernism as the appropriate period concept for digital literature, the foreword
reminds us that only a now-defunct distinction between highbrow
and lowbrow art buoyed up theories separating modernism from
postmodernism. This isn’t the 1980s
anymore
(#pressman2014), they only half-jokingly growl, in a way that
is likely puzzling to those without disciplinary training in modernism. Behind this
impatience is New Modernist Studies, an interdisciplinary, cultural
studies-inflected approach to modernist literature dating from 1994 with the
founding of the journal Modernism/modernity and the
inaugural Modernist Studies Association (MSA) Conference in 1999. The journal’s
inaugural issue announces an interdisciplinary editorial approach grounded in
modernists’ insistence that changes in
the arts be viewed in conjunction with changes in philosophy, historiography,
and social theory, to say nothing of the scientific shifts that they claimed as
part of their moment's cultural revolution
(#rainey1994). The MSA Conference crystallized this approach
by expanding the canon, addressing issues of class, gender, sexuality, race, and
empire, and emphasizing technology and new media. Pressman’s book seems to fit in
because it reshapes modernism in light of digital culture and dovetails with the
latest New Modernist criticism, which has expanded the traditional historical and
geographical boundaries of what is considered to be modernist. I refer
here to the recent trend of approaching modernism through a transnational
approach. For more about this temporal and geographic expansion, see The New Modernist Studies
(#mao2008) Ultimately, the Foreword’s feisty pugilism,
like Clint Eastwood in Dirty Harry, dares you to make
their day by claiming that Pressman does not subscribe to the policies of canonical,
temporal, and spatial expansionism under two decades of New Modernist Studies.
Digital Modernism’s central insight — that a new genre,
digital modernism, remixes older works of literary modernism to flout
expectations of contemporary electronic literature — supports these diversifying
efforts. But Pressman’s modernist canon privileges the usual suspects of Ezra Pound,
James Joyce, and T. S. Eliot, hearkening back to the bad
modernism of pre-1994 scholarship. To learn more about bad modernism, see the edited
collection of the same name, Bad Modernism
(#mao2006) The same can be said about Pressman’s digital
canon, which features authors who have already attracted scholarly attention (the
fêted YHCHI appears in two chapters) and whose conscious literariness makes them
legible to traditional scholarship. With this caveat, we can answer their parting
question, Should I not only read this
book but also assign it in classes and give it to all my friends and
family?
(#pressman2014), in the affirmative answer (though it
certainly depends on one’s family).
The foreword’s cheekiness does not offset the stiffness that calcifies much of the
book inside its stringently cultivated framework of signposts, justifications, and
qualifications. This is particularly true of the dauntingly learned Introduction,
which, with its fifteen-page section Defining My Terms
(itself divided into five subsections) prefacing sections on The Stakes of My Argument,
Critical Influences, and Chapter
Summaries, reads like a book prospectus and distances readers from the
clear, dynamic, and ingenious close readings yet to come. That the Introduction
skips from Part II straight to Part IV suggests that even an Oxford University Press copyeditor cannot
keep this structural rabbit warren straight. Of course, the micromanaging
Introduction has a serious purpose: to convince serious readers that electronic
literature is serious stuff. Pressman explains,
There is a countermovement underway,
this book argues, a serious effort to encourage digital literature to be
taken seriously.... [T]he majority of this book focuses on Internet-based
literature in order to show how and why one of the most maligned of literary
spaces, the web — one accused of fostering reading habits that destroy deep
attention and devalue hermeneutic analysis — is actually the place where
serious literature stages its rebellion and renaissance.
(#pressman2014)

This is indeed an important task, and Pressman is equal to it. Her close readings of
digital literature do reward
(one of her key terms) her attention, and they do renovate (another key term) modernism by
revealing its imbrication in contemporary digital culture. Remediate completes the core lexicon of Digital Modernism, which adds to Bolter and Grusin’s
concept (#bolter2000) a new affordance: close reading. Pressman’s
comparison of early twentieth-century modernism and contemporary digital modernism
reveals that remediation is both a product of and an invitation to close reading,
which rewards critical attention
by renovating texts and
technologies. In doing so, Digital Modernism
effectively remediates not just modernist new media, but indeed close
reading itself — hence this review’s title.
The Introduction responsibly, if ponderously, hits its required disciplinary beats by
defining modernism, electronic literature, digital modernism, close reading, and New
Criticism. Readers from a variety of fields are swiftly caught up to speed, ensuring
the book’s accessibility to a broad audience. In defining close reading as a careful application of focused attention
to the formal operations in a literary text
(#pressman2014), Pressman strikes a strong blow in the battle
quantitative formalism now wages against close reading. For a discussion of
the debate over the future of close reading in literary studies, see In Praise of Overstating the Case: A Review of Franco
Moretti’s Close Reading
(#ross2014) A close reading-positive critic, she claims
that her texts inherently contain complexity: they suggest,
invite,
encourage,
push, even propel
(#pressman2014) all sorts of readings. Assuredly,
readers are rewarded by attending to Pressman’s close readings, but
the degree to which we owe this brilliance to the text or to the critic’s ingenuity
remains an open question.
Pressman’s most controversial definitions cover electronic literature and New
Criticism. She defines electronic literature through aesthetic and material criteria
— born-digital works that are computational and processural, dependent upon the
operations of the machine for its aesthetic effects
(#pressman2014) — an austere characterization that makes no
reference to the Internet, networks, or multimedia. Pressman restricts her gaze
further by focusing on digital modernism, a subgenre that rejects mainstream
electronic literature’s investment in hyperlinks, interactivity, and multimedia. As
a result, when she deprecates the small but certain canon
(#pressman2014) of first-generation electronic literature, we
could retort that she simply replaces it with a different small but
certain canon. Still, Digital Modernism’s canon hangs
together by other means than the rubber stamping of an expert’s approval: digital
modernism renovates and remixes literary modernism by
being text based, aesthetically
difficult, and ambivalent in [its] relationship to mass media and popular
culture
(#pressman2014). Like the earlier modernism it remediates,
digital modernism challenges
traditional expectations about what art is and does. It illuminates and
interrogates the cultural infrastructures, technological networks, and critical
practices that support and enable these judgments
(#pressman2014)
This account savors somewhat of Theodor Adorno’s immanent critique and Frankfurt
School social criticism, The Frankfurt School refers, of course, to the group
of Marxist thinkers originally based out of the Frankfurt School for Social
Research. Adorno, Max Horkheimer, Walter Benjamin, Herbert Marcuse, and Jürgen
Habermas are generally considered among its practitioners. Immanent critique
refers to Adorno’s revision of Hegelian dialectics. For more on immanent
critique, see his Negative Dialectics
(#adorno1966); for a general introduction to Frankfurt School
theory and method, see The Dialectical Imagination
(#jay1996) but Pressman submerges the Adornian themes in
favor of the New Criticism she so passionately champions. Paradoxically, it is
precisely this championing of old methods that makes Digital Modernism so refreshing in debates over the fate
of close reading in the face of new methods from the digital humanities (DH). She
positions Marshall McLuhan as a central figure in the scholarly uptake of the New
Critical principles first espoused by I. A. Richards and F. R. Leavis. As Digital Modernism uncovers layers of technological and
aesthetic histories contributing to electronic literature, its reuptake of close
reading can be seen as anticipating Matthew Kirschenbaum’s recent essay What Is Digital Humanities, and Why Are They Saying Such
Terrible Things About It?
(#kirschenbaum2014). This essay calls for DH to turn its analysis on
itself, praising Alan Liu’s The Meaning of the Digital
Humanities
(#liu2013) for its Science Studies-style analysis of a single DH
project. Kirschenbaum exhorts us to detail the material conditions of knowledge
production, including usage patterns and citation networks
(#kirschenbaum2014) — to do, in other words, what Pressman
does for New Criticism.
Recuperating the New Critical heritage in foundational texts of New Media Studies —
chiefly The Mechanical Bride
(#mcluhan1951)
(#mcluhan1962)
(#mcluhan1964) — takes up Chapter One. Pressman moves far beyond hoary
chestnuts about the global village and the medium being the message, revealing that
his method was always approaching the
broader category of the literary within complex media
ecologies
(#pressman2014). Advocating a slow, focused attention and rigorous
consideration of texts (#pressman2014), Pressman
echoes recent reevaluations of New Criticism that cut through the stale, straw-men
stereotypes that often compromise critiques of close reading.For other
scholarly accounts that advocate New Criticism, see Praising It New: The Best of the New Criticism
(#davis2008) and Miranda Hickman and John McIntyre’s Rereading the New Criticism
(#hickman2012) Though she supports the efforts of Critical
Code Studies to analyze code regardless of its output, it should not replace rigorous analysis of the aesthetic
ambitions and results of technopoetic pursuits
(#pressman2014). Close reading, as an avant-garde critical
response that respects aesthetic complexity, provides this rigor — and pleasure:
For anyone who has read a good close
reading, one that takes you through a journey in a text that you’ve read
before and teaches you to see it anew, you know how transformative the
experience can be. A good close reading can change your mind. It can make
you reread and reconsider. Close reading can be not only about art but can
become art, and for the New Critics, this was part of the point.
(#pressman2014)

By claiming that close readings are themselves cultural artifacts, Pressman elegantly
sidesteps arguments that close reading demands a single correct
interpretation. Although some of the stronger claims about McLuhan’s digital hipness
force the issue through diction — he apparently knows how different data sources and circuits of flow
constitute a literary experience
(#pressman2014) — her genealogy joining modernism and digital
modernism through McLuhan is otherwise solid.
Chapter Two, Reading Machines: MACHINE POETRY AND EXCAVATORY
READING in William Poundstone’s electronic literature and Bob Brown’s
Readies, surveys early reading technologies, both real (the
tachistoscope, subliminal advertising) and imagined (the hypothetical
Readies machine dreamed up by American modernist Bob
Brown). This survey demonstrates that
technologies of reading, not just writing, are an integral part of American
literary history
(#pressman2014)our reading practices [are] always shaped by historical
contexts and media formats
(#pressman2014). Although the stories of these technologies
have been told elsewhere — the chapter relies heavily on Swift
Viewing
(#acland2013)Suspensions of
Perception
(#crary1999) — what Pressman adds to these media-archaeological
accounts is, as one should expect, excellent close readings, particularly of William
Poundstone’s Project for the Tachistoscope {Bottomless
Pit}. For me, this reading of Project is
incomplete: in calling the text a parable about reading in the midst of medial shift, Pressman empties
Poundstone’s Flash narrative of its critical charge. Is the bottomless pit, whose
sudden and troubling appearance constitutes Project’s
plot, really only a symbolic entity: a
thing to read
(#pressman2014), or is it also something very literal —
perhaps a timely representation of fracking, which has caused all-too-real
collapsing sinkhole pits to appear all across the United States, from New Mexico to
Pennsylvania?
This lack of attention to current events is, again, likely a space issue but worth
mentioning because critiques of New Criticism single out its ahistoricism. Chapter
Three, Speed Reading: Super-position and Simultaneity in
YHCHI’s Dakota and Ezra Pound’s Cantos, shares this blindness. Pressman
develops another excavatory reading in her analysis of Dakota, but it, too, could be literally about excavation,
as its South Dakota-to-South Korea setting documents the transformation of a state
during a twenty-first century gold rush for the minerals on which Dakota’s Flash iterations depend. Space constraints thus
leave chinks in Digital Modernism’s erudite armor. The
last half of Chapter Two, for example, relies on Pressman’s access to a rare text:
the 1931 collection of poems Bob Brown commissioned from major modernists, including
Gertrude Stein, Filippo Marinetti, and William Carlos Williams, for Brown’s Readies
machine. Pressman argues that these
poems are textual acts of programming; they are code
(#pressman2014). This parallel is more than a metaphor, and
it is one of the most powerful, successful theses in Digital
Reading. Unfortunately, its corresponding close reading is allotted a
single paragraph.
To be fair, though, when the reader pushes past the forest of scholarly apparatuses,
the masterful close readings lying in wait are well worth the price of admission.
The sixteen-page close reading of Dakota is sheer joy:
beautifully written, snappily paced, and filled-to-bursting with ideas. As it layers
evidence showing that Dakota is a close reading of
Pound’s Cantos, it argues that Dakota elicits both close reading and speed reading. Dakota’s retroaesthetic
(#pressman2014) therefore challenges assumptions about
digital reading practices, revealing that identity is distributed across and informed by network
technologies
(#pressman2014). But no more about Dakota. Readers of Digital Humanities
Quarterly are simply exhorted to read this unforgettable section of
Digital Modernism.
Chapter Four, Reading the Database: Narrative, Database, and
Stream of Consciousness, reviews contemporary electronic adaptations of
James Joyce’s Ulysses (1922) to show that our definitions of novel...change
and adjust under the influence of digital databases
(#pressman2014). Without falling into technological
determinism, Pressman analyzes Twitter, Flash, and print adaptations to show that
they share a database
aesthetic intended to provide access to human cognition. Digital Modernism shows that these iterations are invested
in representing cognition by unpacking traces of Ulysses in them: a Twitter performance by Ian Bogost and Ian McCarthy,
Judd Morrissey and Lori Talley’s The Jew’s Daughter,
and Talan Memmott's My Molly (Departed). Pressman’s
engaging descriptions reveal that the most famous modernist invention — the
stream of consciousness developed from William James’s psychology —
models cognition as a database-based operation of search and retrieval. This chapter
concludes that consciousness is always
mediated and distributed across technologies
(#pressman2014). Though the argumentation is generally
persuasive, I regret Pressman’s Joyce-centrism. Digital
Modernisms refers to an outdated canon of modernism that privileges the
men of 1914 (T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, James Joyce, Wyndham
Lewis). Can Pressman find no electronic renovations of, say, Virginia Woolf, May
Sinclair, or Dorothy Richardson to balance the book’s elaborations of Joyce, Pound,
and Eliot? And if not, what does that say about digital modernism?
Though digital modernism does not conform to the expanded modernist canon, it does
share modernism’s difficulty. Digital modernism rejects popular expectations of what it means to play
new media objects
(#pressman2014)what we think to be real and analog about humanness is
actually the result of digital production
(#pressman2014)nightmarish task
(#pressman2014)The Jew’s
Daughter, Pressman shares a personal confession:
[T]he difficulty of deciphering this
work compelled me to undertake dramatic non-media-specific efforts. In order
to follow the narrative, I resorted to printing out all of the screens and,
on each page, highlighting in one color what text had changed and in a
different color what text would change. I also kept a detailed list of notes
identifying the main characters. But, even with this skeleton key, I
hesitate to attribute proper names to the ‘anonymous limbs and parts’ I
collected, assembled, and discuss in this chapter. Morrissey’s text is
incredibly difficult, and it depends on a disciplined reading
practice.
(#pressman2014)

This confession is hardly shameful. In this passage Pressman
describes not just close reading, but indeed close rereading, thus
making new traditional techniques of scholarship
(note-taking, list-making). Some brave critic may develop different tools for
wrangling these resistant electronic texts, perhaps tools accepting the
fast-paced, hard-to-read, sensory-overloading style, appreciating difficulty as an
aesthetic experience rather than overcoming it. Until then, Pressman’s
strategy of combining close reading and media archaeology is rigorous and
effective.
The fifth chapter, Reading Code: The Hallucination of Universal
Language from Modernism to Cyberspace, is by far the longest, perhaps
because it performs the kind of political critique that I found lacking in the
second and third chapters. Pressman takes over a hundred pages to explore the
insights that emerge when computing
and literature are approached as sharing a historical and ideological
core
(#pressman2014). Interpreting Eric Loyer’s digital novel
Chroma within the broader Western tradition seeking
universal language, Pressman demythologizes the belief that universal language is possible with the
right textual code. This belief undergirds ideologies that code is universal and
that cyberspace (or even digital culture more broadly) is natural or
inevitable
(#pressman2014),
Pressman analyzes YHCHI’s Nippon as as a critique of the homogenizing
influence of the English-based and Western-focused web
(#pressman2014)poets and philosophers [who] have fantasized about
Chinese as universal code
(#pressman2014)’s
difficulty dramatizes how computers work by translation and approximation, thereby
disabl[ing] contemporary
hallucinations about universal language
(#pressman2014)imaginative narratives, theories, and
mythologies about the natural and universal power of digital code
(#pressman2014), Pressman demonstrates why cultural and
political critique is still relevant.
Half the length of Chapter Five, the brisk concluding chapter, CODA — Rereading: Digital Modernism in Print, Mark Z. Danielewski’s Only Revolutions, incorporates this print
novel to show all literature...is
impacted by digitality
(#pressman2014). In this case, even non-electronic
literature demands that the reader
reread in order to close read
(#pressman2014). This 2006 epic of a pair of doomed but
free-spirited road-trippers, from which Danielewski consciously jettisoned
references to media, might seem an unlikely specimen. But if the strategy of digital modernism involves
making it new by a recursive act of engaging with a
literary past through media
(#pressman2014), then Only
Revolutions belongs. As a conclusion, the Coda cleverly uses Only Revolutions to review the broader argument that
digital modernism illuminates both modernism and the history of New Media. Here
Pressman finally relaxes — the Coda fancifully describes Only
Revolutions’s included bookmarks as meeting in the middle and kissing
(#pressman2014) and disarmingly identifies which of
Danielewski’s crowd-sourced data points was her personal submission— and makes rewarding read out of what could
have been a banal retread. This tonal anomaly, when considered as a performative
extension of her argument, has a purpose: Digital
Modernism remediates scholarship itself as it reveals close reading to
be immanent to digital culture, so Pressman is rereading herself. Only one
difficulty remains. If the dream of universal language is, as Pressman argues, a
dangerous hallucination, and if close reading can be applied to any text, is close
reading the scholar’s final hallucination?

Acland, Charles. Swift Viewing: The Popular Life of Subliminal Influence. Durham,
NC: Duke University Press, 2013.
Adorno, Theodor. Negative Dialectics. Trans. E. B. Ashton. New York: Routledge,
1966.
Bolter, Jay David and
Richard Grusin. Remediation: Understanding New
Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
Crary, Jonathan. Suspensions of Perception: Attention, Spectacle, and Modern
Culture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Davis, Garrick, ed. Praising It New: The Best of the New Criticism. Columbus, OH: Ohio
University Press, 2008.
Derrida, Jacques. Two Words for Joyce. In Derek Attridge and Daniel
Ferrer (eds.), Post-Structural Joyce: Essays from the
French. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984, pp.
145-185.
Hickman, Miranda and
John McIntyre, eds. Rereading the New Criticism.
Columbus, OH: Ohio University Press, 2012.
James, David and Urmila
Seshagiri. Metamodernism: Narratives of Continuity and
Revolution.
PMLA 129.1 (2014): 87-100.
Jay, Martin. The
Dialectical Imagination: A History of the Frankfurt School and the Institute
of Social Research, 1923-1950. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1996.
Kirschenbaum, Matthew.
What is Digital Humanities, and Why Are They
Saying Such Terrible Things about It?
differences 25.1 (2014): 46-63.
Liu, Alan. The Meaning
of the Digital Humanities.
PMLA 128 (2013): 409-23.
Mao, Douglas and Rebecca
Walkowitz, eds. Bad Modernisms. Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press, 2006.
Mao, Douglas and Rebecca
Walkowitz. The New Modernist Studies.
PMLA 123.3 (2008): 737-48.
McLuhan, Marshall. The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1962.
McLuhan, Marshall. The Mechanical Bride: Folklore of Industrial Man.
1951. Berkeley, CA: Gingko Press, 2002.
McLuhan, Marshall.Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. 1964.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
Pressman, Jessica. Digital Modernism: Making it New in New Media. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2014.
Rainey, Lawrence, and
Robert von Hallberg. Editorial/Introduction. Modernism/modernity 1.1 (1994): 1-3.
Ross, Shawna. In
Praise of Overstating the Case: A Review of Franco Moretti’s Distant Reading.
Digital Humanities Quarterly 8.1 (2014). http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/1/000171/000171.html

