Digital Humanities, Postfoundationalism, Postindustrial
                    Culture
James Smithies
24 April 2014

I would like to thank Alan Liu for reading an early version of this article, and
Julia Flanders and the anonymous DHQ reviewers for
their extensive and penetrating comments. All failures of interpretation and fact
are the responsibility of the author.

Preparatory
This article seeks to explore concepts of significance to the broader Humanities
community, and in so doing graft them into the main trunk of Digital Humanities
theory and method. This makes a position statement useful. The argument that
follows reflects an approach to Digital Humanities (and a view of Digital
Humanities) oriented towards the Humanities Computing tradition and what Patrick
Svensson would refer to as the
technology as tool
(#svensson2010)
approach to the field. Because of this, it risks hypostasizing what is
only a thesis into a statement of intent, or worse, a totalizing claim that the
ground of our discipline is of a particular (rather than multivariate) nature.
That would be an unsupportable, and unproductive, approach. That said, it
is my hope that the article provides additional intellectual
justification for a turn to code-craft practices outlined at the Speaking in
Code workshop at the University of Virginia’s Scholars’ Lab in 2013 , and the adoption of a mindset broadly
commensurate with digital artisanship. That topic requires further exploration,
and is somewhat peripheral to this present article, but is important to keep in
mind: as a scholarly discipline we require conceptual anchors and an openness to
theories and methods borrowed from cognate disciplines, but in our daily
practice digital humanists are reminded of the importance of craft and the value
of tacit knowledge. It is my contention, even accepting my own rudimentary craft
skills, that this is where the discipline has the most to offer the broader
Humanities community.
It is counter-productive, however, to ignore the field’s entanglement with
postindustrial culture, the rise of technocratic and neoliberal modes of
government, and the so-called crisis in the humanities that
has seen Humanities disciplines struggle with policy decisions weighted in favor
of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines
(#menand2010). Although a complex soup, this comprises the
post-World War Two cultural, intellectual and technological background to the
field: it is an important part of our heritage as a community. And while it is
perhaps of more interest to intellectual and cultural historians than digital
humanists per se, it provides essential context — even, perhaps, an ontological
ground — that is important to parse if we are to understand the purpose and
potential of the field. This is especially so if it is accepted that the crisis in the Humanities,
whether real or imagined (#schmidt2013), is related to deeper
epistemological problems connected to the relative value of scientific and
humanistic modes of knowledge creation. This issue touches on issues of
fundamental importance for the scholarly community: while there is none of the
sense of revolution that accompanied the culture wars of
the latter twentieth century, some scholars are questioning the binary
opposition of foundationalist and anti-foundationalist modes of knowledge
creation, symbolized most starkly in logical positivism on the one hand and
postmodern relativism on the other. This paper follows G.B. Madison , J. Wentzel Van Huyssteen , Paul Healy (#healy2005)
(#healy2007)
(#ginev2007)
(#bevir2011b) in labeling this effort
postfoundationalism.

These writers are searching for a
non-defeatist
(#healy2007)
epistemological stance, one that rejects Cartesian foundationalism as
unattainable but remains capable of underwriting
the truth-value of our
interpretations
(#madison1991)
. The issue speaks to a broader impulse to seek methods that are

neither foundationalist nor relativist
(#madison1991)
, but still capable of advancing knowledge. In his recent book on the use
of the R programming language for literary study, digital humanist Matthew
Jockers touched on something similar when he noted that methods described in his
book reflect a post-Popperian stance somewhere
between strict positivism and
strict relativism
(#jockers2013)
. Jocker’s mention of post-positivism represents an important statement
given its associations with method in the hard and social sciences, and is
deserving of further exploration, but it is outside the scope of this article.
Post-positivism does indeed hold significant opportunities for digital humanists
working with methods derived from or closely associated to the computer and
social sciences, but the argument that follows treads a fine line between
researchers like Jockers whose work draws them towards methods prominent in
those consciously scientific disciplines, and others who
are more focused on cultural theory and critique. Its goal is to explore the
possibilities inherent in a bridging concept
(postfoundationalism) that might work equally well for all sectors of the
community. If successful it will be broadly agreeable to both ends of our
disciplinary spectrum; if unsuccessful it may well disappoint all parties.
Because of its engagement with issues of epistemology and method, there is a need
to navigate terrain familiar to historians of ideas: on the one hand the
argument must avoid the kind of unit-ideas approach, popular with mid-twentieth century historians
like A.O. Lovejoy, which enumerates ideas as a record of in-group culture , and on the other it must not assume to
comprehend the inside of
actors’ minds (#burns2006)
(#olsen1993). These methodological issues are considerable, and
the article’s conclusions should certainly be weighed against them, but if
comments like Jockers’ reveal a dawning orientation for the field as a whole
there are many threads to pull: intellectual, cultural, historical as well as
theoretical and methodological. It will be enough if this present article is
agreed to be a useful contribution to that process.
Another problem is, of course, that any analysis of the digital humanities must
traverse vast distances. Brett Bobley, CIO and Director of the U.S. National
Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) Office of Digital Humanities (ODH), has
presented a fabulously broad definition of the field that illustrates this issue
well:
I use digital humanities as
an umbrella term for a number of different activities that surround
technology and humanities scholarship. Under the digital humanities
rubric, I would include topics like open access to materials,
intellectual property rights, tool development, digital libraries, data
mining, born-digital preservation, multimedia publication,
visualization, GIS, digital reconstruction, study of the impact of
technology on numerous fields, technology for teaching and learning,
sustainability models, media studies, and many others.
(#gavin2012)
This is well and good and, ignoring for the moment people who would
strongly disagree with such a broad statement, useful in its Catholicism. But it
makes the task of defining the digital
humanities difficult (#terras2013). Even if there is
no great desire to define a discipline in the traditional
sense of the term, the field needs to find intellectual levers that can make
sense of a very broad definitional continuum, and explain to stakeholders what
DH is, how it is connected to the current difficulties encountered by the
humanities, how it is connected to broader postindustrial culture, and how
technical DH outputs should be assessed. Without answers to these issues the
field is unlikely to gain either high levels of student engagement, or a portion
of increasingly competitive funding sources.
Postfoundationalism is one such intellectual lever, but the centrality of it to
this article should not suggest it is universally applicable, or unproblematic
as a concept and label: it could perhaps sit under P alongside hundreds
of other similar concepts in a Dictionary of DH
Terms, but it is enough to hope that it can serve the purposes of
this article and provide entry to the conceptual domain I aim to navigate. It
will not be useful for all digital humanists, or be applicable to all DH
practices. It certainly shouldn’t be accepted uncritically as a unit-idea in the Lovejoyian
sense. It is, however, well-suited to an exploration of the epistemological
implications of Svensson’s
technology as tool
(#svensson2010)
approach to the digital humanities, which focuses on building digital
outputs ahead of engaging in more traditional humanistic pursuits related to
interpretation and critique. Because of this the technology as tool approach tends to produce
non-traditional scholarly outputs like web archives, ontologies, data models,
and suchlike. Indeed, much of what follows is informed by development of the UC
CEISMIC Canterbury Earthquakes Digital Archive and the search to find robust
arguments to make technical work like this count as research
(#millar2011)
(#millar2012)
Justifying non-traditional humanities work to academic administrators can be a
challenging task, which isn’t helped by the relative lack of conceptual work
across the community. Jan Christoph Meister has suggested that the amount of energy that our community
invests into theoretical and methodological critique of its practices and
their limitations is still disproportionally low, resulting in a
lack of understanding about what a shared methodology for the field might look like . Meister’s comment is perhaps slightly out of date
given the recent debates related to defining DH (one of
which will be examined in detail later in this paper), and it ignores
significant conceptual work undertaken by projects like the United Kingdom’s
AHRC funded ICT Methods Network (AHRC 2005 – 2008) and various communities of
practice (TEI, manuscript studies, epigraphy, computational linguistics) but his
underlying premise remains valid. There is a need to explain in scholarly terms
what key concepts carry weight for digital humanists, and how the field and its
associated theories, methods, practices, and outputs relate to broader currents
in intellectual culture. It is only by positioning the field in the context of
broader scholarly discourses and processes driving the contemporary academic
knowledge economy — by defining a shared methodology — that
a solid claim can be made for long-term institutional investment in it.
This article therefore articulates a view of the digital humanities that hopes to
advance the discipline across broad academic and scholarly contexts. It will
succeed in its aims if it is both comprehensible to newcomers and stimulating
for experienced practitioners: a bridging effort, but one
undertaken with serious intent. It proceeds by isolating a key debate for
examination, describing two concepts that go a significant distance to solving
issues raised by that debate (but not far enough), and exploring the theoretical
writings of a selection of high profile digital humanists. The goal (a
non-trivial undertaking) is to illustrate the utility of postfoundationalism as
a conceptual tool, its interdependence with postindustrial culture, and the
light it sheds on our understanding of what DH is. If successful, the
article, rather than making an essentialist claim that Digital Humanities is
defined by postfoundational method, will constitute a contribution to
the developing digital humanities agenda:
A field’s agenda consists of what
its practitioners agree ought to be done, a consensus concerning the
field’s problems, their order of importance, the means of solving them
(the tools of the trade), and perhaps most importantly, what constitutes
a solution. Becoming a recognized practitioner means learning the agenda
and helping to carry it out.
(#mahoney2004)


The DH Moment
In his introduction to Debates in the Digital
Humanities, The Digital Humanities
Moment, Matthew Gold notes that the practice has
arrived amid larger questions
concerning the nature and purpose of the university system
(#gold2012)
. As the discipline develops, these questions of cultural and intellectual
context are becoming both more relevant and more contested because, as insiders
to DH know, although multivariate the conversation returns to the same basic
issue again and again, making it difficult to explain (and therefore justify)
the field to university management. Some digital humanists view attempts to
divide practitioners into two separate camps as futile, but in practice it’s
easier to posit a simple binary opposition: if the field orients itself towards
text encoding, computer programming, and producing IT products it is presumed to
need to align towards the sciences, engineering, and empirically-oriented
humanities and social sciences; if it orients itself towards Theory it is
presumed to need to align towards literary and cultural studies. The reality is
far more complex than that (text encoding is a classic example, where technical
issues are inextricably tied to both theory and knowledge context), but it is a
level of complexity that’s difficult to convey to senior scholars and peers in
cognate disciplines and service areas, so the dichotomy assumes more
significance than it deserves.
There are some indications that the global community is incapable of pointing the
way to a workable compromise. Patrik Svensson has suggested that DH is a twenty-first-century humanities project
driven by frustration, dissatisfaction, epistemic tension, everyday
practice, technological vision, disciplinary challenges, institutional
traction, hope, ideals and strong visions — hardly a situation
conducive to clear articulations of intellectual purpose and antecedent . Alan Liu has admitted that he fears:
the digital humanities are not ready
to take up their full responsibility [to reinvigorate the Humanities]
because the field does not yet possess an adequate critical awareness of
the larger social, economic, and cultural issues at stake.
(#liu2011a)
Liu’s argument is that this unpreparedness stems from a general
resistance to theorizing the deeper cultural significance of the discipline
across the DH community, in favor of building tools, systems and websites, and
programming code (#liu2011b). Manfred Thaller probably wouldn’t
agree with that sentiment, but appears similarly frustrated about the
long-standing tension in the digital humanities over whether the discipline has
an intellectual agenda or […]
constitute[s] an infrastructure
(#thaller2012)
. In sanguine voice Willard McCarty has pointed out that …complaints of stagnation and
theoretical poverty… have followed the discipline since at least
1962 (#mccarty2012). It is worth remembering in this
context that the older humanities computing tradition was not associated with
what could be termed the main currents of late twentieth
century intellectual culture. The heated debate surrounding Robert William Fogel
and Stanley L. Engerman’s Time on the Cross: The Economics
of American Negro Slavery (1974) provides one example of how it
could become enmeshed in topical debates (in this case around cliometrics, or
the use of quantification in economic history), but humanities computing was not
known for its engagement with high-profile intellectual trends. Analysis of the
Humanist email seminar, run by Willard McCarty
since 1987, backs this up (#rockwellsinclair2012)
This has changed in recent years as significant numbers of newcomers have joined
the community, resulting in sometimes-heated debates between those supporting a
traditional humanities computing perspective based on
technology as tool, and those supporting the broader
definition enabled by the ODH. The recent DH theory debate
is a case in point, and the example I have chosen to illustrate the utility of
postfoundationalism as a critical tool. While it is only one of several issues
that could be explored, it has been chosen here because it exposes a
particularly troubling issue. The discussion exposed the fault lines that
resulted from the rapid development of the humanities computing tradition into a
broader state-sanctioned Digital Humanities field in the United States.
While the locus of the debate was centered in the U.S., it resonated around the
international community and has particular significance for the field as it
expands into new regions of the world.
The debate’s basic elements are well rehearsed. It took place over the course of
two years, and was conducted primarily amongst North American university-based
digital humanists. In an influential talk describing digital humanists’ values,
given at the CUNY Digital Humanities Initiative in 2010, Tom Scheinfeldt didn’t
mention theory, emphasizing coding and Do It Yourself (DIY) instead . At the time his emphasis seemed unproblematic.
At the 2011 MLA conference in Los Angeles, however, Stephen Ramsay put a finer
point on the issue by asking: Do
you have to know how to code? I’m a tenured professor of digital humanities
and I say yes.
He followed up by opining: But if you are not making anything, you are not
— in my less-than-three-minute opinion — a digital humanist. Ramsay
later softened his position, and has produced his own significant contribution
to digital literary theory, but his comment brought a challenging vein of
digital humanities discourse into the light of day. Some people were angered,
and felt that such a brazen attitude opened up a space for
them to air mounting grievances. The assumption was that Ramsay’s comment
betrayed a lingering prejudice across the discipline that equated the ability to
write computer code with hostility to Theory. This may or may not have been an
unjust conflation, but for whatever reason the association of coding with
anti-theoretical prejudice had become a touchstone issue.
It’s easy for people outside the United States to forget that Alan Liu delivered
a paper at not only the same MLA conference as Ramsay, but also the same panel
(#liuetal2011)Where is Cultural
Criticism in the Digital Humanities?
(#liu2011b), it suggested that this cherished focus on more hack, less yack (focusing on
text encoding and computer programming at the expense of theory and cultural
criticism) threatened to throw away a crucial opportunity for digital humanists,
their students, and the wider tradition. Later in 2011 and the early months of
2012 the topic yielded one of the richest intellectual debates outside Humanist in the history of the discipline. The debate
was prompted by a blog post by a young American scholar, Natalia Cecire, who
disagreed with
the zero-sum logic that it [an
emphasis on coding] implies
(#cecire2011a)
. Primed by a year’s worth of discussion resulting from Ramsay and Liu’s
comments at the MLA in January, a slew of posts and tweets on the topic
dominated digital humanities discourse for several weeks, before petering out
with a return to the status quo: hack over yack. Most digital humanists, it
seems, agreed with Tom Scheinfeldt, who tweeted that
DH arguments are encoded in
code. I disagree with the notion that those arguments must be translated
/ re-encoded in text
(#scheinfeldt2011)
.
Perhaps in an acceptance that the time had come to provide a scholarly forum for
the debate, the first issue of the partially crowd-sourced Journal of Digital Humanities, produced by George Mason
University’s Roy Rosenzweig Centre for History and New Media in late 2011, was
devoted to the Theory problem. Natalia Cecire was invited to provide an
introduction, where she claimed that the hack versus yack divide had sundered
the connection between saying and
doing. Cecire claimed that hacking represented a dominant discourse
across the discipline that celebrated tacit knowledge and valued only
embodied, experiential,
extradiscursive epistemology” at the expense of deeper philosophical,
ethical, and economic issues
(#cecire2011b)
. Although a far less emotive (and important) topic, it wasn’t unlike the
accusations directed at cliometricians like Fogel in the previous century: a
claim that positivism, and especially scientism masquerading as post-positivism,
becomes anathema to the Humanities when it excludes more traditional methods. In
her piece, Jean Bauer openly stated that she was insulted by these kinds of comments, which she
felt betrayed a lack of understanding about the design decisions required for DH
products (#bauer2011). Several other contributions were similarly
forthright in their defense of tacit knowledge. Fred Gibbs came closest to
mediating a way forward by simply pointing out that [p]art of what defines a discipline is the rhetoric
and aesthetics of its scholarly discourse and there are very real
practical needs for the development of DH-specific discourse, in order to
evaluate scholarly outputs and engage in other normal administrative tasks . Perhaps the most effective contribution (and
certainly the most concise) to that first issue of the Journal of Digital Humanities was offered in Word and Code, jointly authored by Tom Scheinfeldt and Ryan Shaw.
It consisted merely of Scheinfeldt’s tweet and Shaw’s reply:

DH arguments are encoded in code. I disagree with the notion that
those arguments must be translated / re-encoded in text.

@foundhistory @ncecire If you can't explain to me in words how your
code works, you don't really know how it works.

(#scheinfeldtshaw2011)
The two tweets provided a summation of the hack versus yack debate in 280
characters, with a substantial dose of irony.
What’s missing here, crucially, is that the theory debate prompted by Cecire
probably only represented the further development within the U.S. digital
humanities movement (itself containing digital history, digital literary studies
etc.) of digital cultural studies, an event that had been presaged by the
pre-existence of digital media studies (#mcpherson2009), and
should have been welcomed as a sophisticated addition to the field. The fact
that it wasn’t points to one of the fundamental weaknesses in the movement:
consistent recourse to a category error that conflates the contributing fields
of the digital humanities with the (extra)discipline itself. The problem usually
appears with the conflation of DH with digital literary studies, rather than
digital cultural studies, to the point where it sometimes seems as if English
departments are taking over the field to the detriment of
digital history, classics and so on. Mathew G. Kirshenbaum devoted an essay to
the issue in 2010. Titled What Is Digital humanities and
What’s It Doing in English Departments?, the piece noted that
English departments have historically been hospitable settings for scholars interested in
humanities computing, because of their natural interest in text analysis and
publishing (#kirschenbaum2010). Kirschenbaum was quite
right in noting this can only be a positive thing given the need for
institutional support, but DH has also been well supported in History and
Classics departments and it would be improper (and perhaps even absurd) for
English departments to claim special ownership of the field. If this was to
happen there would not only be confusion about what DH is, but digital
historians and classists (etc.) might become unwittingly mired in the famously
heated debates characteristic of literary studies.
This was precisely what happened when Stanley Fish (#fish2011),
(#fish2012a) and later Stephen
Marche (#marche2012) wrote essays objecting to the digital
humanities in the New York Times and LA Times respectively. It could be that they were
hoping to prompt a campaign of apologia pro vita sua
against DH, as Anthony Daniels has admitted to savoring , but they were ill-served by their sources. Both
writers, after presumably cursory research into the digital humanities, assumed
that digital humanities equated to digital literary criticism and proceeded to
damn the entire subject-area for the (perceived) sins of this one contributing
area. Their argument against digital humanities revolved around the lack of
benefit in quantitative text analysis rather than the utility of historical GIS,
concordances of ancient texts, digital variorums, or transcriptions of
philosophical writings. If people involved in digital literary studies were
perplexed at the hostility, digital humanists from other fields were left
wondering why eminent literary scholars were damning their field without seeming
to know their specific area of it even existed. A cursory glance at the book of
abstracts for the primary ADHO conference would have alerted Fish et al. to
their mistake. In many ways it was an embarrassment for American literary
studies, as some of their finest betrayed a tendency to engage in heated
polemics in ignorance of elementary facts. The problem continued at the 2013 MLA
conference, with one panel discussion, titled The Dark Side
of the Digital Humanities
(#chun2013) generating ire for its participants’ conflation of DH
with the recent trends towards Massive Open Online Courses, or MOOCS, which
digital humanists have been largely uninterested in (the topic is of more
interest to people interested in eLearning) (#pannapacker2013)
Category errors like these, perhaps better described through reference to the
parable of the blind men and the elephant, do indeed speak to an under-theorized
discipline: one that undermines external perceptions and internal cohesion, and
suggests that the field doesn’t quite know what it is. Given he has watched
digital humanists debating the same issue for several decades it’s telling that
Willard McCarty wondered in 2012 whether debates like these indicate
…immaturity and lack of outward
reach…
(#mccarty2012)
characteristic of the discipline as a whole. To some observers, and
despite a large number of blog posts and even a THATCamp unconference devoted to
the topic (#thatcamp2012), it seems to some observers as if the
discipline is stuck in a Becktian moment
…where the advocates of
computation and interpretation are locked in a dichotomous
opposition
(#riederandrohle2012)
.
And yet Scheinfeldt’s tweet points to a way out of the situation. In distilling
decades of debate into 140 characters it presents us with a nicely reductive
place to initiate analysis. Contra Cecire’s claim that it amounts to zero-sum
logic or a felix culpa, the implication I draw is
that fundamental disciplinary truths must reside inside this
tautology: DH arguments are encoded in code. I disagree with the notion that
those arguments must be translated / re-encoded in text. Wittgenstein
might claim Scheinfeldt’s comment simultaneously says nothing and opens up a
whole world of interpretation. The key, of course, is finding the right tools to
explore this strange new world. Ultimately, of course, this article will argue
that postfoundationalism is one of the most satisfactory tools we have at our
disposal to understand it, especially when considered in the context of
postindustrial culture. In order to understand why, we must explore two slightly
less satisfactory concepts first.
Immanence
It is a fruitless exercise to imply that the digital humanities are incapable of
leading us towards intellectual depths as American literary critics like Fish
and Marche have, or that the entire field should adopt the theoretical
perspectives of one of its contributing disciplines (or, indeed, the theoretical
debates of one of its contributing countries). The knowledge domain is too
different from anything we’ve encountered before, and study of it too limited,
for us to understand what its intellectual potential might be, let alone decide
today what its central preoccupations should be for years into the future: it
is, and has been for several decades, in development. This paper suggests that,
given examples like that outlined above, digital humanists need to continue
developing a set of conceptual tools capable of exploring, in the first instance
at least, the hackers’ tautological stance towards code.
It’s easy enough to see why digital humanists have been having the same
conversation for decades. Despite the fact that it brings us up against some
difficult hermeneutic issues, code is at once our tool, our historical record,
and the basis of our theoretical canon. We cannot get away from it. By
extension, an understanding of code (the precise level of understanding is yet
to be defined) must be, along with knowledge of the humanities themselves, a
sine qua non of entry to the field. Louis Menand
would no doubt suggest that we are isolating this aspect of our practice as a
means of exceeding [our] own
history, as a way of defining borders and laying claim to long-term
existence within the academy in the same way that historians, literature
professors and lawyers did before us (#menand2010). The
question isn’t so much whether we are going to make such a stand, and what we’re
going to make it over, as to whether we have the critical tools to make the
stand meaningful to our peers in neighboring disciplines, and administrators
requesting justification for continued support. In order to do this we need to
start with simple concepts and move outwards: first
immanence, then the epistemology of
building.

For the hacking branch of the DH community, then, which
appears to me to be the obviously (and appropriately) dominant branch of the
discipline, computer code is immanent. The Software Studies and Critical Code
communities (themselves part of the DH community in the broader definition
offered by Brett Bobley) have done considerable work on this subject ; (#manovich2013); ; (#fuller2008); , but in simple terms it is easy to illustrate what
this means. One of the signal DH publications of 2011 used facial recognition to
recover the public identities of thousands of
nineteenth-century Chinese Australian immigrants previously hidden in a massive
archival stack at the National Archives of Australia. Tim Sherratt’s single
webpage, titled the real face of white Australia
(#sherratt2011a), is self-explanatory. The real interest for
digital humanists was in his accompanying explanatory blog post , and the two Python scripts he posted on his
public Github account (#sherratt2009)
Script 1. extract_faces.py
#!/usr/bin/python # Loop through images and feed to facial detection script
import os import face_detect #rootdir =
"/home/tim/mycode/recordsearch/src/recordsearchtools/files/E752" rootdir =
"/home/tim/mycode/recordsearch/src/recordsearchtools/files/ST84-1" #rootdir
= "/home/tim/mycode/recordsearch/src/recordsearchtools/files/test" #rootdir
=
"/home/tim/mycode/recordsearch/src/recordsearchtools/files/ST84-1/1907-391-400-[1731871]"
for root, dirs, files in os.walk(rootdir, topdown=True): for file in files:
print 'Processing %s' % file face_detect.process_image(os.path.join(root,
file))
Script 2. face_detect.py
#!/usr/bin/python # face_detect.py # Face Detection using OpenCV. Based on
script at: #
http://creatingwithcode.com/howto/face-detection-in-static-images-with-python/
# Usage: python face_detect.py [image filename] import sys,os from opencv.cv
import * from opencv.highgui import * from PIL import Image, ImageOps
CLASSIFIER =
'/usr/share/doc/opencv-doc/examples/haarcascades/haarcascade_frontalface_default.xml'
CROP_DIR = '/home/tim/mycode/recordsearch/src/recordsearchtools/files/crops'
def detect_objects(fn, image): """Detects faces and then crops the image."""
#grayscale = cvCreateImage(cvSize(image.width, image.height), 8, 1)
#cvCvtColor(image, grayscale, CV_BGR2GRAY) storage = cvCreateMemStorage(0)
cvClearMemStorage(storage) #cvEqualizeHist(grayscale, grayscale) cascade =
cvLoadHaarClassifierCascade(CLASSIFIER, cvSize(1,1)) faces =
cvHaarDetectObjects(image, cascade, storage, 1.3, 3,
CV_HAAR_DO_CANNY_PRUNING, cvSize(20,20)) if faces: i = 1 for f in faces:
#newfn = fn + ".output.jpg" #os.system("convert %s -stroke red -fill none
-draw 'rectangle %d,%d %d,%d' %s" % (fn, f.x, f.y, f.x+f.width,
f.y+f.height, newfn)) #os.system("mv %s %s.orig" % (fn, fn)) #os.system("mv
%s %s" % (newfn, fn)) #print("[(%d,%d) - (%d,%d)]" % (f.x, f.y,
f.x+f.width, f.y+f.height)) file, ext = os.path.splitext(fn) im =
Image.open(fn) # Increase selected area by 50px on each side then crop im =
im.crop((f.x-50, f.y-50, f.x+f.width+50, f.y+f.height+50)) # Minor contrast
adjustment im = ImageOps.autocontrast(im, cutoff=0.5) im.load() crop =
'%s/%s_crop_%s.jpg' % (CROP_DIR, os.path.basename(file), i) im.save(crop,
"JPEG") check_crop(crop) i += 1 def check_crop(crop): """Try to reduce false
positives by doing a second pass and deleting images that fail.""" image =
cvLoadImage(crop); storage = cvCreateMemStorage(0)
cvClearMemStorage(storage) cascade = cvLoadHaarClassifierCascade(CLASSIFIER,
cvSize(1,1)) faces = cvHaarDetectObjects(image, cascade, storage, 1.3, 3,
CV_HAAR_DO_CANNY_PRUNING, cvSize(20,20)) if faces: if faces[0] is None:
os.remove(crop) else: os.remove(crop) def process_image(fn): image =
cvLoadImage(fn); detect_objects(fn, image) def main(): image =
cvLoadImage(sys.argv[1]); detect_objects(sys.argv[1], image) if __name__ ==
"__main__": main()

For a DH hacker these scripts are rich in humanist detail,
from the cultural phenomenon that is Github, to the problems posed by finding
and visualizing sources within very large datasets, to the open source code
movement that underpins DH and prompted Sherratt to post the code in an online
forum, to the referencing of the scripts he used (not only due to licensing
requirements but to show his colleagues how easy his task
was, using code from http://opencv.org/
and adapting it to his purpose). This isn’t to mention the background to the
Python scripting language, its suitability for entry-level programming and its
widespread adoption and centrality to early 21st
century digital products. And like coffee stains in a book margin, we find in
the extract_faces.py configuration script references to
"/home/tim/mycode, suggesting the work was done not on a
proprietary Windows or OSX operating system, but on an open source Linux
machine. If the term code is read in even broader terms than this, as a
metaphor for a thorough-going understanding of how digital culture is engineered
(data architecture and packetization, the nature of databases and networks, the
nature of programming languages etc.) it is possible to see even more
possibilities, at the point where DH intersects with not only computer science,
but the History of Technology, Software Studies, and Science and Technology
Studies (STS). In 10 PRINT CHR$(205.5+RND(1)); : GOTO
10 Nick Montfort et al. point out that attempts like these, to
position
the program’s output in a space
of symbolic meanings and design principles…
(#montfort2012)
offer rich new interpretative possibilities, but it is equally important
to recognize that at some level source code will always remain impenetrable, or
spectral
(#chun2011)
. Such is the complexity of modern computing that it has become impossible
for a single person — even the author (in the event there is a single author) —
to grasp what’s going on as functions are called, libraries unpacked, and
voltage levels set within logic gates. The reading above ignores these issues
and the mechanics of the code itself, but it perhaps indicates some of the
mountainous interpretative possibilities inherent in the lines of code being
created by digital humanists.
The Epistemology of Building
While the immanence of computer code provides justification to scholars involved
in Software Studies, and digital humanists aware that field is either cognate or
part of the broader tent depending on their definitional
stance, it doesn’t provide a lot of justification for digital humanists seeking
evidence that the more technical kinds of digital humanities outputs should be
accepted for scholarly assessment. It either relies on techniques of source
criticism practiced by a range of humanist disciplines, or merely states the
obvious point that people who can write code can also read and interpret it. In
order to justify technical outputs as worthy of assessment digital humanists
would be more advised to refer to an approach once outlined by Willard McCarty
in Humanities Computing (2005), augmented by
comments in Humanist and journal articles
(#mccarty2012)
McCarty’s comments may well represent first use, but my
purpose here is not to establish an eponymous origin. My purpose is to suggest
that his cognitive stance has become so widespread it represents a
habit of mind or, mentalité,
that reflects the goals and aspirations of a significant portion of the
community, including Franco Moretti (2005), Julia Flanders (2009; 2012), Galey
and Ruecker (2010), Ramsay and Rockwell (2012) and several others. The
implications of the stance are fascinating. In extended commentaries later
encapsulated in Scheinfeldt’s epigrammatic tweet, McCarty suggests that theories
of computer coding, modeling and design are capable of providing an
epistemological basis for the digital humanities; that rather than being mere
by-products of the development process, they
contain arguments that
advance knowledge about the world
(#galeyandruecker2010)
. The argument proffered is that the need to create models of reality
(ontologies, database schemas, algorithms and so on), required to allow
computers to mathematically parse problems posed by their human operators,
offers a radical new methodological basis for future humanities research. Rather
than being merely an indication of computers’ inability to accommodate the
complexities of human thought and emotion, and by extension historical reality,
the suggestion is that the very inadequacies of the models — their propensity to
be radically inadequate, or at best only broadly reliable — suggest a new way of
looking at the world that is at once accepting of failure, more in tune with
scientific method, and oriented towards process instead of Truth:
Computational form, which accepts
only that which can be told with programmatic explicitness and
precision, is thus radically inadequate for representing the full range
of knowledge — hence useful for locating what gets lost when we try to
specify the unspecifiable.
(#mccarty2005)
Ramsay and Rockwell interpret this to mean that we need to develop a
humanistically
informed theory of the making of technology, an
epistemology of building that provides scholarly justification for DH outputs in
a way that makes sense to our peers in cognate disciplines .
Although there are notable exceptions, such as McCarty’s modeling of Ovid’s
Metamorphosis
(#mccarty2005), the problem with attempts to define an
epistemology of building is that they threaten to float free of the broader
humanities tradition. Commentators like Liu and Cecire might argue that, as
Allen Tate said of the American Southern Critics, they are locked in the present
and cut off from the
benefit of the fund of traditional
wisdom
(#tate1957)
that has dealt with similar problems before. Without arguing specifically
for more critical or cultural theory, David Berry suggests something similar
when he comments that digital humanists need to problematize
what Lakatos (1980) would have
called the hard-core of the humanities, the unspoken assumptions
and ontological foundations which support the ‘normal’ research that
humanities scholars undertake on an everyday basis.
(#berry2011)
Following this line of argument, which is a powerful one, arguments for
more or less critical or cultural theory are simply components of a larger
problem. The hack versus yack debate means little in the context of a
2000-year-old tradition, after all. This isn’t to criticize the many excellent
scholars who have contributed to the discipline over the decades, or to ignore
the growing body of work (much of it cited in this article) that suggests growth
towards what Lakatos terms the ‘hard-core’ humanities. Any digital humanist who
has spent a considerable amount of time staring at code to work out a particular
problem will understand why this is easier said than done: the conceptual divide
that separates Computer Science and the Humanities is large, and it is natural
to only think in one of the two paradigms at any one time. Digital humanists
need bridging concepts, or concepts that work just as well for the digital
humanities as their analog cousins — levers capable of raising our conceptual
understanding to new levels.
Postfoundationalism
Postfoundationalism holds promise as one of these levers. Although it is only one
of several that will be required, it offers our nascent epistemology
of building a useful tool. Mark Bevir points out that for
historians postfoundationalism has the great benefit of avoiding the simplistic
anchoring of explanation in pre-determined facts as with
modernist discourse, or the dissolution of fact into fiction characteristic of
postmodernism. Postfoundationalism asserts that there is no point asserting
either more confidence in our understanding of reality than is justified (as
with modernism and logical empiricism) or retreating into a pessimistic view of
our ability to grasp any one reality at all (as with postmodernism and
postmodern deconstruction) (#ginev2001). Rather, in a
claim that could perhaps be criticized for claiming to have cut the Gordian
knot, postfoundationalism
reject[s] the possibility of facts
outside theoretical contexts. All knowledge incorporates both facts and
theories
(#bevir2011a)
. It is an intellectual position that balances a distrust of grand
narrative with an acceptance that methods honed over centuries and supported by
independently verified evidence can lead, if not to Truth itself, then closer to
it than we were before. Philosopher of science Dimitri Ginev notes that
postfoundationalism offers both a hermeneutic ontology of existence and a hermeneutic theory of
historicity, and buttresses itself by asserting the validity of both
the research process and the outputs of that research process . Revealingly, Paul Healy suggests that
postfoundational rationality aims to develop a situated learning process conducive to the
accretion of knowledge, rather than either positivist or relativist
idealisations
(#healy2007)
. Its devotees hope that it is capable of moving human knowledge and
understanding beyond the
just in time, conflicted
(#liu2008)
postmodern historicism described by Alan Liu towards something equally
accepting of complexity, but more optimistic and empirically oriented. Healy
neatly summarizes the resulting communicative domain in terms of disciplines
embracing
a robust context-transcendent truth
standard which, in virtue of preserving the ‘aporetic tension’ inherent
in the distinction between what is true and what we hold to be true,
suffices to ensure that proffered knowledge claims are held open to
critical scrutiny in an indefinitely extended array of situated
forums.
(#healy2007)
The approach would seem to be well suited to a (trans)discipline like Digital
Humanities that runs the gamut from empirically oriented text analysis to the
development of database models and cultural critique. It could well be, because
it is a field so reliant on a similar hermeneutic, that the digital humanities
prove important to the development of postfoundationalism in the coming decades.
In straddling the humanities and computer science, and using methods derived
from fields as diverse as computational linguistics and sociology, its
practitioners are confronted with a need to re-envisage the nature and goals of
humanistic enquiry and method, in order to make sense of the radically different
questions they’re being confronted with. It makes sense to seek out different
new approaches to assist them in that task. Although it is essential that the
discipline looks to fields like computer science (and perhaps mathematics and
logic) before reinventing the wheel, the basic assumption must surely be that a
new problem domain is likely to require new theories as well as new methods. And
the parallels between emerging DH theory and postfoundationalism are easy to
illustrate.
Few statements of method could suggest a postfoundational orientation better than
McCarty’s comment that
computational models, however
finely perfect, are better understood as temporary states in a
process of coming to know rather than fixed structures of
knowledge
(#mccarty2005)
, or his later point that
the word
computing
is a participle — a verbal injunctive that turns things into
algorithmic performances
(#mccarty2008)
, requiring attention to an ongoing process of iterative modeling rather
than final outcomes. By meditating on the procedures involved in the production
of electronic texts, from the inscription of bits onto hard-drive platters, to
their abstraction in machine code, assembly language and higher level
programming languages, to presentation on our screens, Matthew G. Kirschenbaum
offers what could be seen as a postfoundationalist argument for critical
exegesis focused on process, propagation, and becoming, rather than the fixity of texts, screen,
or image:
New media cannot be studied
apart from individual instances of inscription, object, and code as they
propagate on, across, and through storage devices, operating systems,
software environments, and network protocols …
(#kirschenbaum2007)
Such an interpretation works equally well for a writer like Stephen
Ramsay, who
tries to locate a hermeneutics at
the boundary between mechanism and theory
(#ramsay2011b)
, pointing out that
[T]he stratum that we lodge
ourselves upon with algorithmic criticism is one in which both results
and the textual generation of results are systematically manipulated and
transformed, connected and reconnected with unlike things.
(#ramsay2011b)
Peter Lunenfeld et al. suggest that the discipline needs to engage with design as a method of
thinking-through-practice:
Digital Humanities is a
production-based endeavor in which theoretical issues get tested in the
design of implementations, and implementations are loci of theoretical
reflection and elaboration.
(#lunenfeld2012)
Franco Moretti offers something similar when he notes that for him
[The map itself is not an]
explanation, of course: but at least, it offers a model of the narrative
universe which rearranges its components in a non-trivial way, and may
bring some hidden patterns to the surface.
(#moretti2005)
Extending the theme into the materialist world of the hard drive platters
and inscribed bits that mediate the manipulation of digitized sources, William
Turkel suggests digital humanists would be well-served to think
in terms of
transduction, the conversion of energy from one form to
another
(#turkel2011)
. In their introduction to the Journal of Digital
Humanities special issue devoted to topic modeling, Elijah Meeks and
Scott Weingart note that:
[I]n digital humanities
research we use tools, make tools, and theorize tools not because we are
all information scientists, but because tools are the formal
instantiation of methods.
(#meeksandweingart2012)
It would presumably be possible to find more examples, and others that adopt a
quite different stance, but in this article it is only my intention to draw
attention to a broad habit of mind or mentalité —
enough to justify further exploration — not to assert that postfoundationalism
should represent the definitional sine qua non for
the field. That argument could perhaps be attempted, but it would require a
book-length study and even then be difficult to avoid regression into a
totalizing discourse. The point is more that the statements above suggest a
broadly accepted vision of interpretation as praxis as much as practice,
engagement with a process of continuous methodological and, yes, theoretical
refinement that produces research outputs as snapshots of an ongoing activity
rather than the culmination of completed research.
Postfoundationalism offers a way to package these impulses together momentarily,
in order to consider their collective implications.
There is something in postfoundationalism (in its secular articulation at
least), Postfoundationalism is also associated with postmodern
theology. The general epistemological stance (its approach to the validation
of Truth claims) in that strain is very similar to the
secular versions discussed in this article, but its ontological orientation
places it outside the scope of this article.which resonates with
the epistemological stance adopted by a range of digital humanists.
Scheinfeldt’s tweet suggesting the immanence of code, Sherratt’s webpage,
McCarty’s models, Kirschenbaum’s digital forensics, Ramsay and Rockwell’s
epistemology of building, Moretti’s maps, Ramsay’s algorithmic criticism,
Turkel’s transduction, Meeks and
Weingart’s topic models — these are all examples that sit nicely with the
postfoundational stance because they speak to the immanence of knowledge, the
significance of its built nature, its coherence not within external facts or
contrived narratives but within webs of structure and meaning driven forward by
an iterative process, or praxis, of constant becoming. Research methods thus
come to include the development of ontologies, schemas, authority control
systems, algorithms, scripts, websites, databases and other digital tools that
act as grist to an ongoing dialectic between reality, representation, and
understanding. Any supporting theoretical corpus would focus on the principles
and critical tools that sharpen and refine those methods.
This approach has significant implications for the broader humanities tradition.
By rejecting certain kinds of digital output as being alien to the humanities,
or simply not valid research, is to cut short a process that has the ability to
provide deep insights into our human world, and to adopt a depressingly
short-sighted and pessimistic view of the opportunities provided by digital
tools and methods. Opposition to them betrays an essentialist understanding of
what kinds of knowledge and meaning-production are valid, in much the same way
that scientistic claims function (#ginev2007). It is this
kind of logic which has led the University of Canterbury Library to accept the
deposition of the ontology for the UC CEISMIC Digital Archive into its
institutional repository. At the time of writing the ontology was being
edited in preparation for formal deposit.Although it is by no means
a normal output for a humanities research team, it is accepted that it is a both
a contribution to knowledge, and one that scholars need to be able to reference
and critique.
Postindustrial Culture
Postfoundationalism appears to be a common epistemological stance amongst digital
humanists, and a useful critical tool to help communicate to administrators the
scholarly value of technical digital humanities outputs, but it can also help
explore and communicate the relationship of the digital humanities to wider
postindustrial culture. In doing so it helps explain the less
technical, more politically and theoretically oriented, instantiations of the
field, making it at once a powerful explanatory tool (it can help define both
narrow and broad definitions of the field) and a potentially dangerous one (it
could be latched upon as the rather than a way to
define the field).
The political implications of digital humanists’ postfoundational orientation can
be seen in the development of the #alt-ac, or alternative academic
career movement. #alt-ac began when Brian Croxall, a digital
humanist and adjunct faculty member at Emory University, had a colleague deliver
a paper for him at the 2009 MLA in absentia because he couldn’t afford to
attend. Titled The Absent Presence: Today’s Faculty
(#croxall2009), the paper outlined the difficult job search
process Croxall had been through, and the unfairness implicit in the American
university system, which positions adjunct faculty as the waste product of graduate education . The paper and accompanying blog post generated a
storm of interest on Twitter and prompted a conversation about alternative
academic careers on that service between Bethany Nowviskie of the University of
Virginia’s DH Scholar’s Lab and Jason Rhody from
the National Endowment for the Humanities. They proposed the #alt-ac hashtag be
used to capture conversations about alternative academic
careers, and Nowviskie later established #Alt-Academy, an online collection of
essays about the subject. The digital humanities community, though their use of
Twitter, had prompted a significant protest against an unfair academic system,
and given voice to a large body of disenfranchised but important stakeholders.
The #alt-ac community continues to educate and advocate for change in both the
orientation of graduate students’ job searches, and the attitude of American
universities to adjunct faculty.
It needs to be remembered that Twitter was by no means an accepted part of
academic culture in 2009; indeed, its appearance was met with similar concern
about the end of intellectual life as accompanied Wikipedia earlier in the
decade. Its use was being spear-headed by digital humanists who, rather than
seeing it as a threat to intellectual integrity and the ability of people to
read extended passages of prose, chose to view it as merely another useful
technology that could be used as part of their broader process: the service was
used by digital humanists to offset their geographic dispersal, share ideas and
new tools, and build an online community. In 2010, Tom Scheinfeldt went so far
as to point out that the use of services like Twitter went beyond the quotidian,
and were actually contributing to the development of a radically new mindset:
In as much as digital
humanities is an Internet-based social network, it should come as no
surprise that digital humanities looks a lot like the Internet itself.
Digital humanities takes more than tools from the Internet. It works
like the Internet. It takes its values from the Internet.
(#scheinfeldt2010)
Digital Humanities is not only characterized by the use of
tools like Twitter (along with code, databases, ontologies etc.), it is
constituted by them; the discipline assimilates digital tools and methods to the
point where they become the thing itself. This is, of course, exactly what we
should expect in bringing technology into such a fundamental relationship to
scholarly activity. As Heidegger noted in 1949, technology is more than mere
techne, or practical art:
the manufacture and utilization
of equipment, tools, and machines, the manufactured and used things
themselves, and the needs and ends that they serve, all belong to what
technology is. Technology itself is a contrivance — in Latin, an instrumentum.
(#heidegger1949)
As Galey and Ruecker noted in their contribution to the DH discussion
about the epistemology of building, tools like Twitter ‘contain arguments that
advance knowledge about the world’. In assimilating them into fundamental
humanistic practice, to the point where understanding of their essential
(engineered) nature is a requirement of participation in the debate, digital
humanists are engaging in a postfoundational process with far-reaching
consequences. A similar argument can be made for the fringe DH activity of
contributing to post-disaster cultural heritage archiving and recovery,
expressed in projects like the September 11 Digital
Archive
(#RRCHNM2002)Hurricane Digital Memory
Bank
(#RRCHNM2011)UC CEISMIC Canterbury
Earthquakes Digital Archive
(#millar2011), and Our Marathon: The Boston
Bombing Digital Archive
(#dillon2013). Although not the first thing people would expect
humanists to become involved in, it doesn’t take much thought to realize that
the interventions of these teams was informed by a range of humanist thinking —
about civic responsibility, the importance of cultural memory, public history,
engaged scholarship — and that were it not for them significant amounts of
valuable cultural heritage content would have been lost. The teams’ scholarly
knowledge was put to use via postfoundational methods that resulted in
significant contributions to national and international culture.
As disaster archiving and the development of the #alt-ac community suggests, a
growth in postfoundational method has developed coextensively with digital
humanities discourse entering the broader public domain. In the American context
it might even be reasonable to suggest the growth in postfoundational method has
resulted in an increase in participation in the public domain.
Prof Hacker, a blog devoted to trends in higher
education and technology started after a THATCamp unconference, was hosted by
the Chronicle of Higher Education in September of
2009. At about the same time articles about both the digital humanities and the
general state of graduate education began to appear in trade and IT
publications. Articles about the 2011 MLA published in The
Chronicle of Higher Education on subsequent days heightened
interest. William Pannapacker’s Digital Humanities
Triumphant? described the intense interest in digital humanities
sessions at that conference, prompting Fish’s series in the New York Times in response (#pannapacker2011).
Jennifer Howard focused her attention on the digital humanities and #alt-ac
movements, exploring the connections between them (#howard2011).
At the same conference, Alan Liu announced the publication of 4Humanities, a web community designed to harness the
interest for the benefit of the humanities. 4Humanities is overt about its role as critic and conscience of
contemporary culture, with a special focus on the effect postindustrial culture
is having on the arts and humanities. The connection between DH and advocacy is
made explicit on the Mission page: 4Humanities began because the digital
humanities community — which specializes in making creative use of digital
technology to advance humanities research and teaching as well as to think
about the basic nature of the new media and technologies — woke up to its
special potential and responsibility to assist humanities advocacy.  The
digital humanities are increasingly integrated in the humanities at large. 
They catch the eye of administrators and funding agencies who otherwise
dismiss the humanities as yesterday’s news.  They connect across disciplines
with science and engineering fields.  They have the potential to use new
technologies to help the humanities communicate with, and adapt to,
contemporary society. These projects have been added to by The Praxis Network, Disclaimer: The author is a
member of this project.a group of
allied but
differently-inflected humanities education initiatives… engaged in
rethinking pedagogy and campus partnerships in relation to the
digital
(#nowviskie2012)
and ADHO Special Interest Groups like Global
Outlook: Digital Humanities (ADHO, 2013-), which seeks to assist in
the equitable global development of digital humanities as a field.

Transform DH
(#cong)Postcolonial Digital
Humanities
(#kohandrisam2013) occupy more overtly theoretical territory,
using critical theory to deconstruct the white, middle-class, and straight
nature of the Digital Humanities and press for more inclusive attitudes. These
projects deploy critical theory in opposition to what they feel is blindness
within the discipline to significant inequities across racial, gender, class and
sexual boundaries, but pay close attention to the built layers of technologies.
Their attitude was summed up at a paper delivered at Digital Humanities 2013,
titled Digital Humanities: Egalitarian or the New
Elite?, where a variety of speakers outlined the work — technical,
theoretical, and political — required to ensure the community’s claims of
inclusiveness are supported by actions, technical standards and protocols .
Just as Software Studies and Critical Code brushed up against my discussion of
immanence, so this part of the digital humanities brushes up against projects
like the Humanities, Arts, Science and Technology Alliance
Collaboratory
(#davidson2002)Fembot
Collective
(#adams2003), and the vast terrain explored in Science and
Technology Studies, Cultural Studies and New Media. This isn’t to mention the
long-standing connection between the digital humanities and the open access
movement, symbolized in projects like Open Humanities
Press
(#j)
(#RRCHNM2011) but reaching far deeper, into relationships with
leading digital presses at M.I.T. and Michigan University, and connections into
library science and scholarly communication networks like Media Commons: A Digital Scholarly Network
(#fitzpatrick2007). It would no doubt be possible to continue
surfacing relevant examples, but it is enough to note that over the course of a
decade, from around 2001–2011, the digital humanities have moved from an
emphasis on technique (represented in the humanities computing tradition) to a
blended
extra-disciplinary
(#underwood2011)
praxis involving a continuum that ranges from purely technical work to
new media and political advocacy. This process has caused significant and
understandable tension; the stakeholder community has struggled to deploy
conceptual tools capable of accommodating such a rapidly expanding audience.
My feeling is that this tension stems from discomfort at the extension of the
field towards cognate disciplines that are often deeply critical of the very
technologies digital humanists rely on. The critical pressure that has been
applied through exposure to these disciplines has resulted in the culturally and
critically engaged projects outlined above, which indicate an acceptance of the
field’s complex relationship to postindustrial culture. This is unsurprising
given the backgrounds of some of the scholars involved in them. Before
establishing 4Humanities Alan Liu explored the
relationship between the Humanities and postindustrial culture in The Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of
Information, arguing that postindustrialism is a technological rationality that has led to
the usurpation of the knowledge economy by corporate interests and threatens
…the death of knowledge in the
information age
(#liu2004)
. He argued that this has shifted the context for the humanities into
corporate environments, requiring new analytical techniques, and new research
agendas focused on the analysis of corporate culture and power. 4Humanities reflects a response to this insight,
actively countering myths benefitting postindustrial technocrats with evidence
from within the Humanities themselves, but anxieties remain.
At the 2013 MLA Wendy Hui Kyong Chun delivered a talk titled The Dark Side of the Digital Humanities, which pointed out the
paradox of a supposedly booming new discipline producing insecure jobs, lacking
scholarly recognition, and requiring a constant search for funding. Chun claimed
she wasn’t criticizing the Digital Humanities so much as the general euphoria surrounding technology and
education and the vapid embrace of
the digital that feeds into the corporatism critiqued by Liu. Her
compelling argument was that the heightened interest in the digital humanities
(the development of a bandwagon)
…allows us to believe that the
problem facing our students and our profession is a lack of technical
savvy rather than an economic system that undermines the future of our
students
(#chun2013)
. Chun’s talk provided a moment of stuplimity, a word
coined by Sianne Ngai to refer to those peculiarly modern moments when
wonderment gives way to an extended duration of
consecutive fatigues:
As in the case of the repeated
pratfalls of the slapstick comedian, stuplimity emerges in the
performance of such fatigue-inducing strategies, in which the gradual
accumulation of error often leads to the repetition of a refrain: too
strong; or something wrong there.

(#ngai2000)
Chun was articulating specific concerns, but they were informed by an
awareness of the kind of cultural critique practiced by Liu. She was pointing
out that the hype associated with the digital humanities shouldn’t (or shouldn’t
be allowed to) hide the fact that the field is as pressured as any other in the
arts and humanities by technocratic tendencies and a drift towards corporatism
within universities.
The field’s attitude to this situation — being beset by the same pressures that
threaten the broader tradition — could define its future. Rejecting the insights
offered by political and cultural theory risks complicity with troubling aspects
of the contemporary world (#zittrain2008); ; (#lanier2010). [S]unny prognostications about a
technologically-enabled future of emancipated knowledge workers and efficient
markets have been undermined not only by the growth of large multinational
technology companies, but unfair labor practices that have all too familiar
parallels in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . As Foucault pointed out, technical forms of knowledge not only
influence the organization of corporate culture, but social life and norms of
conduct as well, making cognizance of the issues even more pressing . In another piece of writing Chun goes so
far as to suggest we have entered a period where long-standing enlightenment
definitions of personal identity and governmentality have been radically altered
(#chun2011)
Experienced digital humanists are aware of the issues. As Julia Flanders puts it,
[d]igital humanities projects
take place, strikingly, in a universe constrained by a set of technical
norms that govern the informational and operational behavior of the
digital environment
(#flanders2012)
. Just as a builder needs her tools, then, so she needs access to ethical
guidelines and informed design histories to avoid contributing to (or merely
providing more reason to resist) the negative social and economic effects of
contemporary technology. This brings to mind the work of writers like Chun ; (#chun2011) and Anne Balsamo , who consider the intersection between software,
design philosophy, identity, and engineering. These writers offer crucial
insights into the digital age, and need to be included within digital humanists’
worldview so they can provide input into postfoundational methods. The same can
be said for the many authors who have produced books and articles on the history
of computing, and historians of technology generally. This is a very well
established field, served by an excellent professional body (the Society for the
History of Technology, or SHOT, established in 1958). Efforts should be made to
understand where synergies between it and DH lie, especially regarding the
concept of materiality and the socio-cultural impact of digital technologies,
but also in relation to pedagogy and research goals.
If these insights are grafted onto the turn to code-craft
signaled at the NEH funded “Speaking in Code”
workshop in November 2013, the field will have a powerful toolkit at its
disposal. Although nascent, this craft movement holds great
promise as a means of expressing postfoundational methods through a guild or
trade-based approach that emphasizes building and experimentation. The stated
goal of the workshop can be described as postfoundational in its desire to
give voice to what is almost
always tacitly expressed in our work: expert knowledge about the
intellectual and interpretive dimensions of DH code-craft, and unspoken
understandings about the relation of that work to ethics, scholarly
method, and humanities theory
(#nowviskie2013)
. The initiative is exciting: the goal appears to be to tease out theory
and method from a hermeneutic of practice. This aligns very nicely to what this
article describes as postfoundational method.
The problem, as always, is accommodating and being informed by views ranging from
a focus on code-craft to the theoretically informed critique of Chun, Balsamo et
al. Some efforts must be made, and ideally some intellectual levers must be
found, to help bridge the gap. Andrew Prescott notes that digital humanists are
well positioned to understand that knowledge is
being turned into a commodity, a data steam disconnected from those who
produce it and turned to commercial advantage by monopolistic
corporations. In arguing for the necessity of the field, he suggests
that
…if humanities scholars wish to
ensure that their understanding and engagement with human knowledge does
not become another Californian commodity, it is essential to engage with
the digital world, and not as consumers but as creators
(#prescott2012)
. Conversely, it seems logical to argue along with Liu that the opposite
is also true: that digital humanists involved in building technologies should be
aware of the critiques of the cultural, economic and political domains they
might seek to retain intellectual freedom from.
It’s important to acknowledge, though, that rather than rejecting insights
produced through cultural critique, many of the projects referred to in this
article are designed as active instantiations of them. Put another way, we could
note that there might not be significant cause for concern: postfoundational DH
method appears to function surprisingly well against issues presented by
postindustrial culture. Not all DH projects are politically motivated — and we
could perhaps hope that the bulk of focus remains on traditional topics like
scholarly editions, concordances and archives, because this is where the
discipline’s main service to the tradition lies — but the more politically
motivated projects appear to revel in the knowledge that digital humanists’
felicity with the manipulation of the postindustrial system’s symbolic
architecture (computer code, and the ICT discourses associated
with the production and maintenance of not only that, but the system’s broader
culture and politics) offers a power that should be mobilized for the common
good. Their understanding of the engineered nature of the postindustrial world
(their facility with the code that powers its key engines, their ability to
build a server rather than be beholden to the dictates of an IT service desk,
their ability to do things cost-free) gives them insight into the world of
informational capitalism. The targeted success of the
projects is due to the realization that
[i]n the new, informational mode
of development the source of productivity lies in the technology of
knowledge generation, information processing, and symbolic
communication
(#castells2010)
.
This isn’t hack versus yack, it’s hack then act. The projects align extremely
well to the goals of more theoretically inclined humanists and evince awareness
of the cultural and ideological implications of the technology industry . Indeed, rather than being anti-theoretical,
the projects described above merely suggest a commitment to post (as opposed to
anti) foundationalism. They indicate attempts to use the tools, paradigms, and concepts of digital
technologies to help rethink the idea of instrumentality for the
Humanities as a whole (#liu2011b). They aim to use the
insights gained from saturation in technical contexts for the greater good of
the tradition, politicizing insights gained through postfoundational method and
mobilizing them against the aspects of postindustrial capitalism that threaten
(and homogenize) the broader arts and humanities community. Historian of
technology Rosalind Williams might suggest they have decided that when culture is no longer an outer
shell of context, but is part of the machine radically new methods
of engagement and scholarly production are required . Whether production ends with the development of a schema, a
data model, a website, a scholarly edition, a journal article or a monograph
should matter less than the fact that production has occurred at all.


Adams, Melissa
et al. Fembot Collective, 2003-, accessed December
01, 2013, http://fembotcollective.org/.
Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO). Global Outlook:DH (GO:DH), 2013 -, accessed December 01, 2013, http://www.globaloutlookdh.org/.
Balsamo, Anne
Marie. Technologies of the Gendered Body: Reading Cyborg
Women. Durham: Duke University Press, 1996.
Bauer, Jean. Who You Calling Untheoretical?
Journal of Digital Humanities 1:1 (2011).
Castells,
Manuel. The Rise of the Network Society: The Information
Age: Economy, Society, and Culture. 1st ed. Hoboken:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.
Berry, David M. The Computational Turn: Thinking About the Digital
Humanities.
Culture Machine 12 (2011): 1-22.
Dyer-Witheford, Nick. Cyber-Marx:
Cycles and Circuits of Struggle in High-technology Capitalism.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1999.
Bevir, Mark. Why Historical Distance Is Not a Problem.
History and Theory 50:4 (2011): 24–37.
Bevir, Mark. Political Science after Foucault.
History of the Human Sciences 24:4 (2011):
81–96.
Bousquet,
Marc. The Waste Product of Graduate Education: Toward a
Dictatorship of the Flexible.
Social Text 20:1 (2002): 81–104.
Burns, Robert M. “Collingwood, Bradley and Historical Knowledge.”
History and Theory 45 (2006): 178–203.
Cecire, Natalia.
When DH Was in Vogue; or, THATCamp Theory.
Works Cited. 2011. Rpt. When
Digital Humanities Was in Vogue.
Journal of Digital Humanities 1:1 (2011a).
Cecire, Natalia.
Introduction: Theory and the Virtues of Digital
Humanities.
Journal of Digital Humanities 1:1 (2011b).
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong.
Control and Freedom: Power and Paranoia in the Age of
Fiber Optics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2006.
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong.
Programmed Visions: Software and Memory. Software
Studies. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2011.
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong.
The Dark Side of the Digital Humanities. 4 Jan.
2013, accessed December 01 2013, http://www.c21uwm.com/2013/01/09/the-dark-side-of-the-digital-humanities-part-1.
Chun, Wendy
H., Richard A. Grusin, Patrick Jagoda, Rita Raley, The Dark
Side of the Digital Humanities, MLA panel discussion, 4 Jan.
2013.

Cong-Huyen, Anne et al. Transform DH (TransformDH),
2012-, accessed December 01, 2013, http://transformdh.org/.
Croxall, Brian.
The Absent Presence: Today’s Faculty.
Brian Croxall. 28 Dec. 2009, accessed December 01,
2013, http://www.briancroxall.net/2009/12/28/the-absent-presence-todays-faculty/.
Daniels, Anthony.
The Digital Challenge, I: LossGain, or the Fate
of the Book.
The New Criterion. Vol. 31, Nov. 2012, p.4.
Davidson,
Cathy N. Humanities, Arts, Science and Technology Alliance
Collaboratory (HASTAC), 2002-, accessed December 01, 2013,
http://hastac.org/.
Dillon,
Elizabeth et al, Our Marathon, 2013, accessed
December 01, 2013, http://marathon.neu.edu/.
Donoghue,
Frank. The Last Professors: The Corporate University and
the Fate of the Humanities. New York: Fordham University Press,
2008.
Fish, Stanley. The Old Order Changeth.
Opinionator. 26 Dec. 2011, accessed December 01,
2013, http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/12/26/the-old-order-changeth/.
Fish, Stanley. The Digital Humanities and the Transcending of
Mortality.
Opinionator. 9 Jan. 2012a, accessed December 01,
2013, http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/01/09/the-digital-humanities-and-the-transcending-of-mortality/?_r=0.
Fish, Stanley. Mind Your P’s and B’s: The Digital Humanities and
Interpretation.
Opinionator. 23 Jan. 2012b, accessed December 01,
2013, http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/01/23/mind-your-ps-and-bs-the-digital-humanities-and-interpretation/.
Fitzpatrick, Kathleen et al, Media Commons: A Digital
Scholarly Network, 2007-, accessed December 01, 2013, http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/.
Flanders,
Julia. The Productive Unease of 21st-century Digital
Scholarship.
Digital Humanities Quarterly 3.3 (2009).
Flanders,
Julia. Collaboration and Dissent: Challenges of
Collaborative Standards for Digital Humanities.
Collaborative Research in the Digital Humanities.
Ed. Marilyn Deegan and Willard McCarty. Farnham: Ashgate, 2012: 67-80.
Fogel, Robert William and Stanley L. Engerman.
Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro
Slavery. 1st ed. Boston: Little, Brown, 1974.
Fuller, Matthew,
ed. Software Studies: A Lexicon. Leonardo.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2008.
Galey, Alan and Stan Ruecker. How a Prototype Argues.
Literary and Linguistic Computing 25:4 (2010):
405–424.
Gavin, M.,
Smith, K.M.,Bobley, B. An interview with Brett
Bobley in M.K. Gold ed. Debates in the Digital
Humanities, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012, pp.
61-66.
Ginev, Dimitri. Searching for a (Post)Foundational Approach to Philosophy of
Science: Part I.
Journal for General Philosophy of Science / Zeitschrift Für
Allgemeine Wissenschaftstheorie 32:1 (2001): 27-37.
Ginev, Dimitri. A (Post)Foundational Approach to the Philosophy of Science:
Part II.
Journal for General Philosophy of Science / Zeitschrift Für Allgemeine Wissenschaftstheorie
38:1 (2007): 57–74.
Gibbs, Fred. Critical Discourse in Digital Humanities.
Journal of Digital Humanities 1.1 (2011).
Gold, Matthew K. Introduction: The Digital Humanities Moment.
Debates in the Digital Humanities. Ed. Matthew K.
Gold. Minneapolis: U Minnesota Press, 2012, pp. ix-xvi.
Golumbia,
David. The Cultural Logic of Computation.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2009.
Grafton, Anthony.
The History of Ideas: Precept and Practice, 1950-2000
and Beyond.
Journal of the History of Ideas 67:1 (2006):
2-3.
Healy, Paul. Rationality, Hermeneutics And Dialogue: Toward A Viable
Postfoundationalist Account Of Rationality. Ashgate Publishing,
Ltd., 2005.
Healy, Paul. Rationality, Dialogue and, and Critical Inquiry: Toward a
Viable Postfoundationalist Stance.
Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social
Philosophy 3:1 (2007): 134–158.
Heidegger,
M. The Question Concerning Technology (1949).
Basic Writings. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1978, pp. 283-317.
Howard, Jennifer.
Hard Times Sharpen the MLA’s Lens on Labor and the
Humanities.
The Chronicle of Higher Education. 9 Jan. 2011,
accessed December 01, 2013, http://chronicle.com/article/Hard-Times-Sharpen-the-MLAs/125905/.
Jockers, Matthew
L. Text Analysis With R for Students of Literature.
DRAFT. Springer, 2013.

Jöttkandt, Sigi, David Ottina et al. Open Humanities
Press (OHP), 2007-, accessed December 01, 2013, http://openhumanitiespress.org/.

Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. Mechanisms: New Media and the
Forensic Imagination. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007.

Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. What Is Digital Humanities and
What’s It Doing in English Departments?
ADE Bulletin 150 (2010): 1-7.

Koh, Adeline and Roopika Risam, Postcolonial Digital
Humanities, 2013-, accessed December 01, 2013, http://dhpoco.org/.
Lakatos, I.
Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980.
Lanier, Jaron.
You Are Not a Gadget: a Manifesto. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 2010.
Liu, Alan. The Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of
Information. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
Liu, Alan. Local Transcendence: Essays on Postmodern Historicism and the
Database. U Chicago Press, 2008.
Liu, Alan. The state of the digital humanities: A report and a
critique.
Arts and Humanities in Higher Education 11.1-2
(2011a): 8-41.
Liu, Alan. Where Is Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities?
Seminar. University of Nottingham, July 5, 2011b. Rpt. Where Is Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities?
Debates in the Digital Humanities. Ed. Mathew Gold.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012: 490–509.
Liu, Alan et
al, The History and Future of the Digital
Humanities, Modern Language Association convention, Los Angeles. 7
Jan. 2011.
Liu, Alan et al.
4Humanities: Mission, accessed December 01,
2013, http://4humanities.org/mission/.

Lunenfeld, Peter et al. Digital_Humanities.
Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2012.
McCarty, Willard.
Humanities Computing. Houndmills: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2005.
McCarty, Willard.
What’s Going On?
Literary and Linguistic Computing 23:3 (2008):
253–261.
McCarty,
Willard. The Residue of Uniqueness.
Historical Social Research 37:3 (2012):
24-45.
McPherson,
Tara. Introduction: Media Studies and the Digital
Humanities. Cinema Journal 48, no. 2 (January 1, 2009):
119–123.
Mackenzie,
Adrian. Cutting Code: Software and Sociality. New
York: Peter Lang, 2006.
Madison, Gary
Brent. Philosophy Without Foundations.
Reason Papers 16, Fall (1991): 15–44.
Mahoney, Michael
S. Finding a History for Software Engineering.
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 26:1
(2004): 8-19.
Manovich, Lev.
The Language of New Media. Leonardo. Cambridge,
Mass: MIT Press, 2001.
Manovich, Lev.
Software Takes Command: Extending the Language of New
Media, 2013.
Marche, Stephen.
Literature Is Not Data: Against Digital
Humanities.
Los Angeles Review of Books. 28 Oct. 2012.
Meeks, Elijah and Scott Weingart, The Digital Humanities Contribution to Topic Modeling,
Journal of Digital Humanities 2:1, Winter
2012.
Meister, Jan
Christoph. DH Is Us or on the Unbearable Lightness of a
Shared Methodology.
Historical Social Research. 37:3 (September 2012):
77–85.
Menand, Louis.
The Marketplace of Ideas: Reform and Resistance in the
American University. New York: W.W. Norton, 2010.
Millar, P.,
Smithies, J. et al, UC CEISMIC Canterbury Earthquakes
Digital Archive, 2011-, accessed December 01, 2013, http://www.ceismic.org.nz.
Millar, P.,
Smithies, J., Thomson, C. et al., UC QuakeStudies
Repository, 2012-, accessed December 01, 2013, https://quakestudies.canterbury.ac.nz.

Montfort, Nick et al. 10 PRINT CHR$(205.5+RND(1)); : GOTO
10. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 2012.
Moretti, Franco.
Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary
History. London; New York: Verso, 2005.
Ngai, Sianne. Stuplimity: Shock and Boredom in Twentieth-Century
Aesthetics.
Postmodern Culture 10:2 (2000).

Nowviskie, Bethany et al. #alt-academy, 2011-,
accessed December 01, 2013, http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/alt-ac/.

Nowviskie, Bethany et al. The Praxis Network,
2012-, http://praxis-network.org/.

Nowviskie, Bethany et al. Speaking in Code
Workshop, 2013, http://codespeak.scholarslab.org/.
Olsen, Mark. Motives, Memory and Mind: Collingwood’s Theory of Actions and
Histoire Des Mentalités.
Historical Reflections / Réflexions
Historiques
19:1 (January 1, 1993): 35–62.

Pannapacker, William. Pannapacker at MLA: Digital
Humanities Triumphant?
The Chronicle of Higher Education. 8 Jan. 2011,
accessed December 01, 2013, http://chronicle.com/blogs/brainstorm/pannapacker-at-mla-digital-humanities-triumphant.

Pannapacker, William. On The Dark Side
of the Digital Humanities.

The Chronicle of Higher Education. 5 Jan. 2013,
accessed December 01, 2013, http://chronicle.com/blogs/conversation/2013/01/05/on-the-dark-side-of-the-digital-humanities/.
Prescott,
Andrew. An Electric Current of the Imagination: What the
Digital Humanities Are and What They Might Become.
Journal of Digital Humanities. 1:2 (2012).
Ramsay, Stephen.
On Building.
Stephen Ramsay. 11 Jan. 2011, accessed December 01,
2013, http://stephenramsay.us/text/2011/01/11/on-building/.
Ramsay, Stephen.
Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism.
Urbana: U. Illinois Press, 2011.
Ramsay, Steven. Who's In and Who's Out? MLA Los Angeles, 2011.
Ramsay, Stephen and Geoffrey Rockwell. Developing Things: Notes Toward an Epistemology of Building in
the Digital Humanities.
Debates in the Digital Humanities. Ed. Matthew
Gold. Minneapolis: Michigan University Press, 2012, pp75-84.
Rieder, Bernard and Theo Rohle. Digital Methods: Five Challenges.
Understanding Digital Humanities. Ed. David M.
Berry. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012, pp.67-84.
Rockwell, Geoffrey and Stefan Sinclair, The Swallow Flies Swiftly Through: An Analysis of
Humanist,
Digital Humanities 2012 Conference Abstracts,
University of Hamburg Press, 16 – 22 July 2012, pp.339 – 341.
Rogers, Katina.
Humanities Unbound: CareersScholarship Beyond
the Tenure Track,
Scholars’ Lab, April 23, 2013, accessed December
01, 2013, http://www.scholarslab.org/research-and-development/humanities-unbound-careers-scholarship-beyond-the-tenure-track/.
Ross, Andrew. In Search of the Lost Paycheck, in Trebor Scholz, ed.
Digital Labor: The Internet as Playground and
Factory. New York: Routledge, 2013, p.13-32.
Roy Rosenzweig
Center for History and New Media (RRCHNM). September 11
Digital Archive, 2002, accessed November 29, 2013, http://911digitalarchive.org/.
Roy Rosenzweig
Center for History and New Media (RRCHNM). Press
Forward, 2011–, accessed December 01, 2013, http://pressforward.org/.
Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media (RRCHNM) and
University of New Orleans, Hurricane Memory Bank,
2005, accessed November 29, 2013, http://hurricanearchive.org/.

Scheinfeldt, Tom. Stuff Digital Humanists Like: Defining
Digital Humanities by Its Values.
Found History. 2 Dec. 2010, accessed December 01,
2013, http://www.foundhistory.org/2010/12/02/stuff-digital-humanists-like/.

Scheinfeldt, Tom. (FoundHistory). DH arguments are encoded
in code. I disagree with the notion that those arguments must be translated
/ re-encoded in text. 11 Nov. 2011 2.42 pm. Tweet. Rpt. Words and Code.
Journal of Digital Humanities, 1.1 (2011).
Scheinfeldt, Tom and Ryan Shaw. Words and Code.
Journal of Digital Humanities 1.1 (2011).
Schmidt,
Benjamin. The Data Shows There’s No Real Crisis in the
Humanities.
The New York Times, November 4, 2013, accessed
December 01, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2013/11/04/the-fate-of-the-humanities/the-data-shows-theres-no-real-crisis-in-the-humanities.
Sherratt, Tim.
Github/Wragge. 15 Sept. 2009, accessed December
01, 2013, https://github.com/wragge/.
Sherratt,
Tim. The Real Face of White Australia. 21 Sept.
2011a, accessed December 01, 2013, http://invisibleaustralians.org/faces/.
Sherratt,
Tim. The Real Face of White Australia.
discontents. 21 Sept. 2011b, accessed December 01,
2013, http://discontents.com.au/the-real-face-of-white-australia/.
Short,
Harold, Marilyn Deegan et al. AHRC Methods Network,
2005 – 2008, accessed December 01, 2013, http://www.methodsnetwork.ac.uk/.

Skallerup, Lee et al. Digital Humanities: Egalitarian or
the New Elite?,
Digital Humanities 2013 Conference Abstracts,
University of Lincoln-Nebraska, 16 – 19 July 2013, pp.406-408.
Svensson,
Patrik. The Landscape of Digital Humanities.
Digital Humanities Quarterly 4:1 (2010).
Svensson,
Patrik. The digital humanities as a humanities
project.
Arts and Humanities in Higher Education 11.1-2
(2011): 42-60.
Tate, Allen. The New Provincialism: With an Epilogue on the Southern
Novel (1945). The Man of Letters in the Modern
World: Selected Essays, 1928-1955. London: Thames and Hudson, 1957:
325.
Terras,
Melissa, Nyhan, Julianne, Vanhoutte, Edward. Defining
Digital Humanities: a Reader. Farnham: Ashgate, 2013.
Thaller, Manfred.
Controversies Around the Digital Humanities: An
Agenda.
Historical Social Research 37:3 (2012):
7-23.
THATCamp,
THATCamp (The Humanities and Technology Camp)
Theory. Rutgers University. 13-14 Oct. 2012.
Turkel, William J.
Intervention: Hacking History, from Analogue to Digital
and Back Again.
Rethinking History 15:2 (2011): 287-296.
Underwood,
Ted. Why digital humanities isn’t actually the
next thing in literary studies.

The Stone and the Shell. 27 Nov. 2011, accessed
December 01, 2013, http://tedunderwood.com/2011/12/27/why-we-dont-actually-want-to-be-the-next-thing-in-literary-studies/.

Van Huyssteen, J. Wentzel. Postfoundationalism and
Interdisciplinarity: A Response to Jerome Stone.
Zygon 35:2 (June 2000): 427–439.
Williams,
Rosalind. All That Is Solid Melts into Air: Historians of
Technology in the Information Revolution.
Technology and Culture 41:4 (2000): 641–668.
Zittrain,
Jonathan L. The Future of the Internet — And How to Stop
It. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008.

