In a test bed with Kafka. Introducing a
                    mixed-method approach to digital
                    stylistics
J. Berenike Herrmann
8 January 2018


Introduction
A whole new generation of scholars has recently been entering the world of
digital stylistics, appreciating the availability of digital resources in the
form of data, tools, and infrastructure. The recent proliferation is visible for
example in monographs (e.g., (#hoover2014)
(#jockers2013)
(#mahlberg2013)
(#sinclair2016)
(#eder2016)) and guides to text analysis in programming languages
such as R and Python ((#bird2015)
(#jockers2014)), just to name a few. Contributions to the digital
analysis of style abound in journals such as DH
Quarterly, Digital Scholarship in the
Humanities (formerly Literary and Linguistic
Computing), the newly founded Digital Literary
Studies and Cultural Analytics, the proceedings of the Workshops on Computational Linguistics for Literature,
as well as in Language and Literature and the
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics.
Last, but not least, the Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO) has
formed the new special interested group (SIG) Digital
Literary Stylistics (SIG-DLS). This is an exciting time, with a discipline of digital
stylistics in Digital Humanities emerging, expanding, and gradually maturing.
However, despite these recent developments, and despite a substantial tradition
of digital analyses of literary style across fields (see (#biber2011)
(#burrows1987)
(#holmes1998)
(#mahlberg2015)
(#semino2004)
(#steen2010) as a
discipline is still in a nascent status. This can be directly linked to its
interdisciplinary character, with a kaleidoscope of methods, research paradigms,
and world views. This heterogeneity is as much a potential source of confusion
as well as a great asset:
On the one hand, the diversity may pose disadvantages. Those digital
stylisticians who are trained in hermeneutics see themselves confronted with
handling the requirements of an empirical quantitative research paradigm, with
issues such as standardized research designs, procedures of data sampling, and
analytical strategies, including statistics. Others, who come from fields based
around computing, such as natural language processing (NLP), computational
linguistics, and corpus linguistics, may be unsure what to do with the
deliberate open-endedness of qualitative, hermeneutic research and the important
role ascribed to subjectivity and context (cf. (#vanzundert2015)).
Yet others may be very skeptical about the possibility of clearly defined
‘methods’ for digital stylistics in the first place, because of a perceived
irreconcilability of numerical and hermeneutic approaches. Overall, a number of
reasons accounts for a perceived lack of clear methodological standards,
procedures and designs.
On the other hand, the juxtaposition of hermeneutic and scientific-empirical
traditions provides a great potential for literary style research within DH.
Qualitative approaches such as literary criticism and stylistics have developed
a rich expertise in describing and understanding the aesthetic effects of
literary artifacts. Quantitative approaches such as corpus linguistics,
quantitative linguistics, computational linguistics, and data science generally,
have concentrated on exploring and explaining large-scale and general language
models by linguistic features. In digital stylistics, approaching aspects of
style from different angles – be these probabilistically obtained feature
patterns, predictive and descriptive accounts of quantitative style
distributions, or in-depth interpretations of stylistic phenomena in particular
textual contexts – opens up a truly multi-methodological research panorama.
In fact, digital stylistics, with its many branches and predecessors, has seen
method-mixing for a long time (see, e.g., (#biber1988)
(#burrows1987)
(#craig1999)
(#leech2007)
(#spitzer1961)). Yet, we are presently dwelling on a perceived
irreconcilability of a form of distant reading
(#moretti2000)close
reading
(#ransom1937) in a more aesthetically oriented variety (#fish2012) on the other. Where distant reading applies aggregating
measures that are designed to produce quantitative evidence with statistical
backup, hermeneutic reading maintains a more qualitative relationship with
(whole) texts, explicitly calling for open-ended and subjective dimensions of
interpretation. Between these two paradigms, many see close
reading as old-fashioned for being anecdotal, overly
subjective, or uncontrolled, whereas to others, distant reading appears
perilous for being reductionist, deterministic, or
neo-/postpositivist. This situation is reminiscent of the paradigm
wars in social science, where for years, one could either adhere
to a quantitative or a qualitative mindset (cf. (#creswell2014)
(#punch2014)
My suggestion for DH is not to fortify an either-or-mindset
(possibly mistaking digital stylistics for a distant-reading only paradigm, cf.
(#gooding2013)), but to work on a principled coalition of the
two views, propelled by a simple and pragmatic view of selecting the best
fitting method for any given research question (cf. (#creswell2014)
(#creswell2007)
(#symonds2010)). In line with the recently emerged mixed-method
paradigm of the social sciences, I thus suggest that DH stylistics should move
beyond the dichotomies of close vs. distant,
qualitative vs. quantitative, explanatory vs.
exploratory, inductive vs. deductive,
understanding vs. explaining – and, possibly even
hermeneutic vs. empirical One should note that
mixed-methods is essentially an empirical research paradigm. This is
compatible with a digital stylistics that understands
empirical in the wide sense – as the
acquisition of knowledge through observation
(“Wissensgewinn durch Beobachtung”) (#eibl2013) here cannot possibly
mean resorting to an everything-goes approach that
defocuses the nitty-gritty details of difference, but an informed perspective
that enables scholars to choose particular research designs by their particular
objectives. Seen from the perspective of an emerging discipline of digital
stylistics, the challenge is now to provide a common framework for the disparate
approaches to stylistic inquiry. This includes a transparent and systematic
overview of the different approaches and methods actually employed, as well as a
sort of inventory for what kind of method is suitable for what kind of research
aim. This may possibly even entail striving for some unifying
epistemological perspective. Some mixed-methods scholars advocate
pragmatism, such as Creswell who assumes a strong link between
worldviews (e.g., postpositivist, social
constructivist, participatory, pragmatic) and research methods (#creswell2014). Others, such as Kelle describe weaker links
between particular world views and methods (#kelle2008)
That quantitative style metrics may combine with in-depth studies of style
patterns of individual texts has already been proposed from within DH and
labeled as middle-distance reading ((#craig2013), for a similar approach, see also (#craig1999)), or scalable reading ((#mueller2012), see , ). These propositions, however, have just begun to
receive broader attention. In fact, many may have mistaken them for the
examination of mid-sized data sets that are neither
big data (for a recent discussion of this term, see
(#borgman2015)) nor individual texts, but something in
between. In my view, this data-size-driven reading of the term is overly
simplistic. Rather, the emphasis should lie not so much on the scale in terms of
the size of the data volume examined, but on the research
process. Scaling here means complementing one
methodology with another, compensating for weaknesses of each approach, and
building on the combined strengths. Mueller, in an analogy of using Google
earth, describes the essence of scalable reading as to
zoom in and out of things and discover that different
properties of phenomena are revealed by looking at them from different
distances
(#mueller2012)
. For his account of middle-distance reading, Craig suggests comparing
statistical results […] with fresh readings of the
texts or parts of them, directed by the patterns that are highlighted by
the tests
(#craig2013)
. Yet another approach is rapid shuttling between
quantitatively attained information and hermeneutic close reading (Kirschenbaum
2009), cited in (#hayles2012)). Accordingly, Hayles
states that the tension between algorithmic analysis and hermeneutic close
reading should not be overstated, since their relation is often
configured not so much as an opposition but as a
synergistic interaction
(#hayles2012)
.
Ideally, to provide
a better understanding of research problems than either
approach alone
(#creswell2007)
, mixed-methods research is a process of combining discrete qualitative
and quantitative steps, motivated by some degree of methodological and
epistemological awareness. It thus needs to address the role of
interpretation Within mixed-method approaches, interpretation is being
recognized as a vital operation, linked to the tradition of hermeneutic
inquiry:
data analysis, including quantitative data
analysis, is a process of interpretation involving basic hermeneutic
principles
(#ness2011)
. Good mixed-methods research in DH stylistics should fulfill criteria
that allow for complementariness (cf. (#miles2014)) – and methodological awareness. If such criteria are met, subjectivity
and phases of open-ended interpretation are highly justified. These become
problematic only where introspection and impressionistic observations are
used in an opaque way, which however is true for any quantitative-scientific
study as well (#rudman2016). Problematic is also a dogmatic
rejection of (aggregated) data. Indispensable practical
factors of sound mixed-method research are clear language use and the
definition of concepts and terms. and the degree of open-endedness
and subjectivity involved in either form of research – issues that
have received some attention also from within DH (e.g., (#gius2015)
(#mccarty2005)
(#ramsay2011)
(#vanzundert2015)). Mixed-method research highlights the
hermeneutical dimension of quantitative approaches, not least by emphasizing
that quantitative researchers are traditionally
in the background, and their own personal biases and
interpretations are seldom discussed
(#creswell2007)
.

Quantitative, qualitative, and
mixed-methods
The most basic distinction between qualitative and quantitative methods
concerns the nature of the data examined, which is normally numerical vs.
non-numerical data (#creswell2014)
(#punch2014). For digital stylistics, this may be simplified
as 'numbers derived from aggregations of words/texts'
(quantitative) vs. '(elements of) meaningful textual
configurations' (qualitative). This discrimination relates to the
more common distinction between big and small data sets. One of the most
fruitful distinctions is that between variable-oriented and
case-oriented analysis: variable-oriented analysis (e.g.,
style variation across author, genre, time in German Modernist
literature) is more often quantitative, and well-suited for
finding probabilistic relationships among variables in a large population,
whereas case-oriented analysis (e.g., paradoxical style of Franz
Kafka’s The Judgment) is more
often qualitative, geared towards finding specific, concrete, historically
grounded patterns common to small sets of cases (#punch2014) have difficulties
with the complexities of causal relationships, while findings of
case-approaches often remain particularistic, i.e.
cannot be easily generalized.
Quantitative, variable-driven research overall strives for a high degree of
control, using standardization and tests of reliability to ensure
replicability and generalizability. It takes care that its measures and
results are not dependent on a particular researcher
(objectivity). In combination with representative
data sampling, it thus aims at overall descriptions of situations and
phenomena in a systematic and comparable way. In its stereotypical form,
quantitative research uses close-ended data collection
tools to settle the discussion, and to delimit the
range of possible interpretation of its results.
By contrast, qualitative research is more sensitive to context and process,
and aims for in-depth and holistic understanding, in order to do justice to
the complexity of a given phenomenon. Samples are usually small, and
sampling is guided by theoretical rather than probabilistic considerations.
Methods are less formalized than those in the quantitative approach, less
replicable, and have greater flexibility (#punch2014). In its stereotypical form, qualitative research uses
open-ended data collection designed to
opening up the discussion, i.e. to generate new
hypotheses and theories and widen the range of possible perspectives on a
phenomenon.
This (simplified) distinction between qualitative and quantitative approaches
is enlightening when considering the actual practices in digital stylistics.
For example, a prominent approach, algorithmic
criticism as proposed by Ramsay (2011), distinguishes between
scientific approaches and what he calls algorithmic
hermeneutics. In Ramsay’s view, the scientific approach
is exceedingly closed-ended, aimed at providing
singular answers to the problem under
discussion
(#ramsay2011)
, framing
the movement from data to interpretation as fraught
with peril
(#ramsay2011)
. By contrast, an algorithmic criticism approaches a (textual) problem
in order that the matter become richer, deeper, and
ever more complicated
(#ramsay2011)
. His suggestion is to apply
hermeneutical freedom
(#ramsay2011)
to the (post-algorithmic) interpretation of quantitative results –
while retaining
the commitment to methodological rigor demanded by
its tools
(#ramsay2011)
. However, to Ramsay, interpretation is necessarily

an insistently subjective manner of
engagement
(#ramsay2011)
– he thus appears to deny digital text analysis the epistemological
potential that lies in iterative (quantitative) hypothesis-testing. What is
more, by putting such a strong emphasis on the role of post-hoc
interpretation, he perilously defocuses the implicit assumptions that feed
into the algorithmic modeling itself (#sculley2008)
In my view, the scientific and humanistic paradigms as sketched by Ramsay
should both contribute to our discipline’s multi-methodological
setup, establishing a rich interconnected network of possible research
questions and methods for answering them. This, of course, has implications
for the
nature of discourse in which text analysis bids
participation
(#ramsay2011)
– in my view, this discourse should involve deep and open-ended
discussions as well as clear-cut conclusions about stylistic facts.
Eventually, people engaged in DH stylistics should generate more
concepts, more theoretical constructions, and be able
to
test their points
(#vanpeer2012)
.
The interesting point about mixed-method approaches is that they maintain the
basic distinction between quantitative and qualitative methods, while
simultaneously transcending it. Thus, they firstly acknowledge the two
paradigms, noting their strength and weaknesses, and then propose to:
[c]ombine the methods in a way that achieves
complementary strengths and non-overlapping weaknesses.
(#johnson2004)
With this general rationale at its core, mixed-methods research has
been established as a third empirical paradigm Recently, scholars like
SymondsGorard have emphasized that a distinction between
quantitative and
qualitative research is a stereotypical
idealization (#symonds2010). As such, it indeed helps
structuring our understanding of practices. However, it may be
misleading to use a dichotomy as a basis for invoking a mixed-methods
paradigm, since research processes ‘in the wild’ are not necessarily
paradigmatic. Rather, they lie on a continuum between
open-endedness vs.
closed-endedness (data collection
tools), non-numerical vs.
numerical (data types), and
interpretation of natural occurring
data vs.
counting/aggregation/statistics
(analytical techniques). A gradual character of
quantification/qualification is actually evident in digital stylistics:
there are many quantitative studies that aim at exploration, rather than
at explanation through hypothesis testing (e.g., data science in the
sense of (#manovich2015)). At the same time, close reading
can be used to test hypotheses derived from statistical quantitative
analyses (e.g., revealing what mode of thought representation is
actually invoked by a certain verb type that contributes significantly
to a factor analysis of genre style). However, I believe that working
with research paradigms has a useful structuring function and therefore
shall be maintained for the time being., with its own range of
research design types (cf. (#creswell2014)
(#creswell2007)
(#johnson2004)
(#tashakkori2010)
Mixed-methods Digital Style Analysis
The strengths of mixed-methods can be directly applied to digital
stylistics: close and distant reading complement each other when adding
meaning to numbers, and precision to hermeneutically obtained insight. Also,
the generalizability of qualitative findings can be increased, as
quantitative findings can be grounded in context-driven analyses. Results
from both approaches can be validated through corroboration and convergence.
Another great asset of such a coalition of approaches is mutual methods
critique (#kelle2008), which likely increases the validity of
data and results as much as that of methods. And finally, a broader range of
research questions can be asked, which leads to a varied and flexible
generation of knowledge (#johnson2004).
In digital stylistics, we are confronted with the fact that
style is a heterogeneous category – already within
literary studies, and ever more so when adopting interdisciplinary and
international perspectives (for an overview of distinct philological
definitions of style, see (#herrmann2015)). A definition that
allows for a quantitative as well as for a qualitative perspective on style,
and mixed approaches, is the following one:
Style is a property of texts constituted by an
ensemble of formal features which can be observed quantitatively or
qualitatively.
(#herrmann2015)
A quantitative, variable-driven approach may be interested in
extracting formal features from a large data set devoid of context, for
example gauging the similarity of authors by looking at
the most frequently used words (the dominant stylometric measure), whereas a
case-driven approach may be interested in aspects
of the holistic gestalt of single texts, or the function of previously
extracted featured within that context. A third kind of approach may use a
quantitative measure for exploring possible new variables (and thus, as a
quantitative-heuristic approach may not fit the simplified
quantitative-qualitative dichotomy).
The next section starts with a short (and by no means complete) overview of
qualitative and quantitative methods relevant for digital stylistics,
including a view on their respective strengths and limitations. It is
followed by a sketch of my own mixed-method study, which will then be
reported in more detail in section (3). Section (4) will subsequently draw
conclusions for practices in digital stylistics as an emerging field within
DH.

The Method of the Art
In actual stylistic research, the ensemble of formal
features is as a rule viewed either from a predominantly
quantitative or from a predominantly qualitative angle. With their predominant
qualitative perspective, literary criticism, (digital) stylistics, aesthetics,
and (digital) narratology have traditionally relied on versions of close
reading. This mode of scrutinizing analysis and synthesizing interpretation of
literary artifacts exploits the kind of situated and intuitive knowledge that
human evolution has produced in concert with scholarly expertise (for a
discussion of hermeneutics in DH, see (#vanzundert2015). In
stylistics, it has been most typically applied to: (a) explorations of the
effect of certain stylistic features in textual interaction, and (b) determining
the stylistic character of a piece of art as a coherent unit, including the
contributing elements (#herrmann2015). Goals of close reading are
linguistic observation as much as literary
insight, in the sense of Spitzer’s hermeneutic circle (#leech2007)
Applications of close reading to stylistic analysis are documented by a vast
literature, with its typical concentration on particular cases (and, alas,
sometimes vague generalizations). Variants of close reading, as a form of
qualitative research, are applied also in digital text analysis, including
computational linguistics/natural language processing (NLP). For example,
digital style research employs a range of visualization and manual annotation
tools For a number of easily accessible text analysis visualization
tools, see the web-based tool Voyant (#sinclair2016).
for close reading, such as KWIC (Keyword in Context), which is a
method typically applied in corpus stylistics. KWIC displays all instances of a
search word vertically, with the words’ direct textual context to both sides
(also called concordance). Running KWIC lists (facilitated by tools
such as AntConc and Voyant, as well as particular functions in R and Python)
allows the discerning of meaning and possibly the lexico-grammatical function of
a particular instance of a lemma in context (for an application in literary
criticism, see e.g., (#m),
depending on the basic methodological approach, CATMA is a tool for manual
hermeneutic digital text annotation that features a comprehensive
narratological tag set (#gius2015). may also involve
some form of close reading. For quantification-oriented annotation paradigms,
this holds true especially for the stage in which annotation (or
tagging) schemata are developed, with a typical back- and
forth-movement between textual context, frequency operations, and theoretical
conceptualization. In much the same way, the stages of close
reading, or qualitative analysis are applied in the development
of machine learning algorithms and error analysis in
computational linguistics (#dipper2008)
In order to ensure some standard of compatibility and transparency also for close
reading, stylisticians have established basic criteria for the
stylistic method (e.g., (#simpson2004)), with
rigorous (based on an explicit framework of analysis),
retrievable (organised through explicit terms and criteria,
the meanings of which are agreed upon by other students of stylistics),
and replicable (sufficiently transparent as to allow other
stylisticians to verify them, either by testing them on the same text or by
applying them beyond that text
(#simpson2004). Despite its vital role in humanistic
inquiry, close reading, as any approach, has its limitations. Mentioned are the
limited capacity in terms of data sets and time, the problems with
generalization, the prominent role of the scholar’s introspection, and the fact
that distinct features and factors are normally intermingled in complex gestalts
and thus may be hard to isolate. Such issues may be discussed and compensated
for in research that combines qualitative phases with quantitative ones.
For quantitative analysis, style needs to be formalized and
reduced to one or few distinctive and machine-readable features (for a stylistic
perspective on style markers, see (#leech2007); for a stylometric
one, see (#stamatatos2009)). This applies to a potentially open
list of linguistic and literary features (e.g., word frequency, length of
words/sentences, vocabulary density, but possibly also more
literary features, such as metaphor, or speech and
thought representation). Quantitative research applies a range of different
methods brought in from the fields of computational linguistics/natural language
processing (NLP) and corpus linguistics. Simple counting
operations (e.g., word frequencies, type-token-ratios, word and
sentence length) are often followed by statistics such as the chi-square test
and t-score, with prominent measures being collocation and keyword analysis (#biber2011)
(#gries2015)
(#hoover2014). Statistically more advanced are multivariate
methods that examine several variables at the same time (e.g., loglinear
regression mainly used in corpus stylistics, as well as ANOVA, principal
component analysis, cluster analysis, discriminant analysis, and factor
analysis; (cf. (#biber2015)
(#diversy2014)
(#gries2015)
(#hoover2014)
(#jockers2013); see also ). One of the
currently most popular techniques of quantitative stylistics is cluster analysis
of stylistic similarity (e.g., using Burrows’s Delta; (#burrows2002)). This kind of analysis operates on the basis of (standardized) measures of
the most common features within and across texts (#eder2016)
(#hoover2004)
(#jockers2013). A typical objective is to quantitatively
scrutinize a particular period for its style, disambiguating an author
effect from other (hidden) kinds of effects, such as
genre, and time. To this aim, a
viable way is to pick this style indicator and generalize over large sets of
literary data (see (#eder2017)). In stylometry, using supervised machine learning to identify
the strength of the stylistic signal currently probably
comes closest to the core of the prototypical quantitative paradigm, ruling out
confounding factors and establishing clear cause-effect relationships (here, the
cause would be one or more of the examined factors author, genre, time; the
effect is the stylistic signal observed in most common
words).See (#underwood2017), whose article on the
genealogy of distant reading was not yet available at the time of writing
and will thus not be discussed in depth. His key argument is that the basic
distinction of what he calls distant reading from other
forms of literary criticism is the practice of framing historical inquiry
as an experiment, using hypotheses and samples (of texts or other social
evidence) that are defined before the writer settles on a
conclusion. (5). He thus draws a basic distinction between
exploratory (other forms of literary criticism) and
explanatory (distant reading) inquiry. Although, as
explained above, I see a great value in mapping the distinction of
distant vs. other forms of reading onto the basic
quantitative vs. qualitative paradigms, I do not
fully agree with Underwood’s general characterization of “distant reading”
as an experimental hypothesis-testing endeavor. There
is, after all, a great number of distant
reading-studies that uses data aggregation methods and big data
sets to explore (emerging) patterns. Such studies, which are fully valid, as
I will show below, do not apply hypothesis-testing in the strict
sense.
However, quantitative methods (such as factor analysis, multi–dimensional
scaling, principal component analysis, and so on) are in fact often used in a
more open-ended and exploratory way, something traditionally ascribed to
qualitative research. Quantitative stylistic exploration may find new features
and relations between known factors, for example between canonicity and writing
style. For example, Algee-Hewitt et al. compared what they call the
archive, that part of ever-published fiction that is
now available in digitized form, to canonical sets of novels. Among their
findings is that archive texts in comparison with canonical
ones are stylistically more similar to a written mode of communication, even in
their spoken passages
(#algeehewitt2016). This finding was not made in
answer to a specific hypothesis, but is a valid one. Similarly, the growing
number of NLP-adaptations to the literary domain (including neural networks,
machine learning, and advanced modes of data mining, cf. (#hoover2013); see also the proceedings of the workshops
Computational Linguistics for Literature Retrievable under http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W/W15/#0700) is typically
used for exploration – hypothesis testing in the strict sense is (still) less
common. NLP methods, as well as those of data science Scholars like
Manovich (2015) and Anderson (2008) take a relatively extreme stance,
proclaiming that with the large available repositories of data, the nature
of numerically transformable data is fundamentally changing: instead of
long data, which is (traditionally) organized in
few variables with many pertaining cases, the new type is wide
data, clustered in many variables with a huge amount of
individual cases (#manovich2015). In data
mining, data exploration techniques incl. dimension reduction
are most important for predictive analysis and machine learning based on
probabilities of correlations. While correlative/association analyses have
long been established in computational and corpus linguistics (as in social
sciences), big data science appears in a new quality.
In its most prominent formulation it forsakes the quest for causality (and
theory) altogether (#anderson2008).
Seen from the perspective of mixed-methods, however, there is no reason for
why one should not include stages of zooming in on causal
relationships. that crunch big data to
aggregated variables (e.g., (#manovich2015)), are able to observe
new patterns and correlations, allowing for a multitude of possible factors to
be examined.
However, regardless of being used exploratorily or explanatorily, with regard to
the questions of literary stylistics, at the present point in time, the
quantitative types of analysis often appear superficial. Features are
necessarily restricted to those than can be reduced to a machine-readable format
and used in automatic analysis. Quantitative stylistics, despite a tendency to
adapt more complex models, is as a rule decontextualized, operates at the
variable level, and is reduced to observing particular types of features. Under
certain conditions, precisely these characteristics may foster progress.
However, in order to attain a more complete degree of linguistic and literary
insight for style, quantitative examinations need to be
complemented by qualitative ones.
To flesh out these thoughts, in the following I will report on my own
mixed-methods study on Franz Kafka’s prose in Newer and Modern German Literature
(corpus of about 5.9 million words).
Making the test bed
From the reservoir of digital methods on the qualitative–quantitative scale, I
selected three easy-to-access, yet established ones. With style operationalized
as an ensemble of formal features (see above), I reconstructed a hypothesis
about Kafka’s style from literary studies, which was then examined in a
complementary successive analysis:

Hypothesis Generation from Literary Criticism. I distilled
from literary criticism converging evidence for a relatively broad
assumption about Kafka’s style, the
solitariness-hypothesis (see below). Finding convincing
observations and arguments from the existing literature is thus a necessary
step in hypothesis generation. This view has been put forward on the basis
of qualitative, hermeneutic interpretations of separate texts (involving the
description of linguistic features and literary effects). The kind of
evidence given so far offers no firm ground for generalization.
Quantitative Hypothesis Testing. My first empirical step was
quantitative hypothesis testing. Extending on prior research (#herrmann2013a), I examined the
solitariness-hypothesis on a wider data basis
(comparing Kafka’s texts to texts by more than 20 other German authors
across time). As will be seen below, this is a somewhat loose
understanding of hypothesis testing. Explanatory hypothesis testing in
the strict quantitative sense would have selected a combination of
hypothesis and method that leaves much less room for confounding
variables. The particular analysis is thus a typical example for the
current state of the field, pending more rigorous and wide-spread
applications of hypothesis testing. For the sake of quantitative
breadth, I relinquished the rich complexity of case-driven analysis, using
as an indicator of style a standardized aggregate
measure of most frequent words, Delta (see below) and cluster
analysis. A problem with this type of analysis is that it does not provide
insights into the particular features that may be responsible for Kafka’s
(assumedly) distinctive style.
Quantitative Exploration. The second analysis applied another
frequency-based measure, keyness, to explore the stylistic
patterns possibly underlying the results from the cluster analysis. Keeping
the time signal relatively constant, I compared Kafka’s word use to four
authors belonging to the same literary epoch, Modernism. Style was here
identified as a statistically defined norm (the
numerical reference being the same corpus used in the first analysis),
treating word forms that are significantly more frequent than that norm as
stylistically marked. Building on prior research
(#herrmann2013b), I manually grouped the top 100
overrepresented word forms into (potential) word classes. A category of word
forms emerged as particular to the Kafka sample that may be used for subtly
managing modality. However, even though this analysis tackles style at the
feature level, it is still strongly decontextualized. More context was
needed to add value and insight to my observations.
Qualitative Text Analysis. In a qualitative close reading of
one of Kafka’s stories (The Judgment) taken
from the same corpus as before, I focused on just two potential modal
particles derived from the previous step. Using KWIC (Key Word in Context) to systematically analyze
their local usage, taking into account the context of Kafka’s story
(including the plot), I examined their use and potential functions
throughout the unfolding story (#herrmann2016). From here,
further analysis may take up several possible leads given by the results.
These may involve a larger data set and increased statistical rigor – as
well as the qualitative detail of other texts and features (modal particles,
negations, and adverbs).
Mixed-Methods Style Analysis of Kafka


Applying Mixed-Methods to Kafka
As described above, a series of interlaced stylistic studies was conducted,
applying different methods tailored to distinct questions on aspects of Franz
Kafka’s writing style.

Hypothesis Generation from Literary Criticism
In Kafka studies, the most basic tenet on Kafka’s style is that it is not
only unique, but even solitary: Scholars converge in
finding that among his generation, nobody else writes like him (cf. e.g.,
(#dhaen2012)
(#frenzel1990)
(#oschmann2010)
(#trost2008)). The proposed solitariness has been related to a
special lexical precision and scantiness, features of
elevated everyday language and technical language,
together with an accumulation of modal adverbs, a hypotactic sentence
structure, and a frequent use of inner monologue and especially free
indirect discourse. The narrative effect of his language use has been stated
as the objective registration of external
events, accompanied by a simultaneous limited internal
perspective of literary characters (e.g., (#engel2010)
(#oschmann2010)
(#scheffel2002)
(#trost2008)). The adjective kafkaesque generally
means complicated, confusing, and threatening
(#kafkaesque), and this label corresponds with a consensus on
the irritation that Kafka’s prose instills in readers, be they naïve or
professional:
Each sentence says 'interpret me', and none will
permit it
(#adorno1981)
. It is an open (empirical) question how much of this effect of
Kafka’s prose may in fact be attributed to his ‘style’, and in how much
it is a matter of plot. Since both dimensions tend
to feed into each other, further research is needed to creatively
establish ways of description and measurement.
Study 1: Quantitative Hypothesis Testing
For my first study, I selected an indicator of style that is firmly
established within stylometry: the most frequent words (mfw) of a text and
text set. The (relative) frequencies of the most common words per text in a
given text set are used to compute a distance measure, which determines the
stylistic similarity/dissimilarity of each text from each other text. I used
a version of Burrows’s Delta ((#burrows2002)
(#eder2016)
(#hoover2004)), which standardizes the mean word frequency (by
calculating the z-score) for each text and then computes the
mean of the absolute differences between the
z-scores for a set of word-variables in a given
text-group and the z-scores for the same set of
word-variables in a target text
(#burrows2002)
.
Z-scores represent the distance between the individual raw
frequencies and an observed group mean, in units of the standard
deviation.In a subsequent cluster-analysis, which employed the
ward-linkage algorithm (#eder2016), the large matrix of
distances scores between individual texts was reduced to hierarchically
aligned groupings of texts that are visualized, the so-called clusters. I
chose a distance measure with cluster analysis because it is a robust
measure of text similarity and has been shown to reliably identify signals
of author, genre, and time (#eder2016)
(#jockers2013), also in German literary texts (#jannidis2014). Stylometric measures, first developed
for authorship attribution, and lately adopted by DH for mostly literary
history studies, have in fact been used widely for exploratory purposes
(#jannidis2014). This shows that a
quantitative-explanatory mapping is too facile; the way in which a
measure is applied essentially depends on the research
question.
My hypotheses were as follows:

H1: Kafka’s texts are more similar to each other than
they are to other texts, and, as a group, are by comparison more
dissimilar from other (groups of) texts. For the
cluster analysis, this means two things: (a) a similarity-cluster can be
observed for Kafka’s texts; (b) the observed Kafka-cluster shows
distances from other (potential) clusters that are greater than any
other distances observed.
H0: Kafka’s texts do not show a greater similarity to each
other than to any other text. In the cluster analysis,
Kafka’s texts do not cluster with each other. However, as authorship is
a strong predictor of style, clustering by author is generally
expected. None of the texts used in the analysis are of
disputed authorship, and the genre signal was kept relatively
constant, with all texts labeled as ‘prose’. The genre signal is a
major confounding factor in authorship attribution (#rudman2016) Therefore, H0 may be
reformulated: Kafka’s texts as a potential group of texts related by
similarity do not show greater dissimilarity to other
groups of texts by comparison. In the cluster analysis, any
Kafka-cluster of texts thus has a similar distance to other potentially
observed author-clusters as these have from each other.

When considering these hypotheses before the background of the chosen method,
a caveat is due: in this application, cluster analysis does not allow
statistical hypothesis testing in a strict sense. In other words,
there is no way of determining the probability of falsely rejecting the H0
(type I error, p-value) or the probability of rejecting a true
hypothesis as incorrect (type II error, the failure to reject a false null
hypothesis, a false negative, i.e., failing to detect
an effect that is present). This means I cannot determine causal or even
correlational relations between variables (authorship as influencing style
as measured by mfw).
I used cluster analysis and its iterative version,
bootstrap consensus trees, applying Eder’s Delta as
facilitated by the stylo package for R (#eder2016). My corpus consisted of 64 German prose texts
available for the stylo suite of tools See https://sites.google.com/site/computationalstylistics/corpora,
three texts by Robert Walser (to whom Kafka has been traditionally
compared), and 27 texts of different length written by Kafka Texts by
Walser were extracted from Gutenberg.org. Those texts, as well as ones
from many more authors (currently more than 2,000) extracted from
Gutenberg-DE, TextGrid Repository, and the German Text Archive (DTA)
have been compiled to form a unified corpus of narrative modernism
(KOLIMO), together with added metadata and a few style features. Visit
the ongoing project under https://kolimo.uni-goettingen.de/about.html
compiled to seven distinct text samples. The final corpus amounts to
altogether 74 text samples (about 5.9 million words). In the analysis,
pronouns were deleted to avoid bias for narrative perspective.

Cluster Analysis using Eder’s Delta. Bootstrap Consensus Tree
Figure 2 shows a bootstrap consensus tree. It is the result of
an iterative cluster analysis, keeping constant all parameter settings but
the number of features (#eder2017). Here the selected feature
is mfw, the most frequent words shared by the included texts. For the
consensus tree, the upper limit of the feature vector was set to 1,500 mfw,
the lower one to 800 mfw. The lower margin was set to 800 mfw in
accordance with JannidisLauer, who however set the upper limit to
3,000 mfw (#jannidis2014). I set the upper limit to 1,500
mfw, thus capturing the range of values where Eder’s Delta’s appears to
perform best (between 1,000 and 1,500 mfw; cf. (#jannidis2015)). However, Evert et al. (2015), who
replicated Jannidis et al. (2015) with more feature samples, state that
the number of features (mfw) remains
a critical factor for which no good strategy is
available
(#evert2015)
. The results thus need to be further tested. Figure 2
shows that Kafka’s texts indeed form a cluster (the light green cluster to
the upper right). It also depicts a number of branches that join texts by
distinct authors (thereby demonstrating style similarity), most pronouncedly
the two main branches in the lower half (both with subbranches of more than
seven authors), as well as two smaller branches each joining two authors
(Keller/Goethe and May/Achleitner). Most of Kafka’s direct contemporaries
are thus joined by the big branch at the lower left (Bonsels, Wassermann,
Falke, Hesse, Mann, Schnitzler), while the branch at the lower right suggest
similarities between older texts (Goethe, Brentano, Arnim, Hoffmann) and the
Swiss (historical) realist Meyer.
In opposition to authors in both these groups, Kafka’s cluster starts
directly from the center, which means that Kafka’s texts are more similar to
each other than to other authors’ texts. However, the same is true for
Gerstäcker, Heiberg, Sapper, Fontane, and Spyri. Note that the consensus
tree is not informative about the distance of any two branches starting from
the root. Hence, the first cluster analysis does not falsify the assumption
that Kafka writes in a solitary way. However, despite being a relatively
robust measure of stylistic similarity (incorporating repeated runs), the
consensus tree provides rather limited information.

Cluster Analysis using Eder's Delta. Dendrograms (1100 MFW)

Cluster Analysis using Eder's Delta. Dendrograms (1300 MFW)
Figures 3 and 4 are more informative with regard to the actual similarities
between texts than Figure 2. These dendrograms (two of the
eight separate dendrograms underlying the consensus tree of Fig. 2) are
snapshots that reflect the particular clustering of
texts with feature-parameter set uniquely to 1,100 mfw and to 1,300 mfw,
respectively. Both depict a situation in which Kafka’s texts indeed form a
cluster, which means that they are more similar to each other than to any
other text in the study. Also, Kafka’s texts (as a group) are at a
relatively long distance from the nearest neighbors, Spyri, Fontane, Sapper,
and Gerstäcker (Fig. 3), and Spyri, Fontane, and Sapper (Fig. 4).
Additionally, forming a group with the four/three nearest neighbors, Kafka
is removed from the rest of the corpus.
Like Fig. 2, despite slight differences, Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 do not falsify the
assumption that Kafka writes in a solitary manner. However, we need to take
into account the company in this outlier group, two
children’s books authors (Johanna Spyri, author of Heidi, and Agnes Sapper) as well as Germany’s chief proponent
of poetic realism (Theodor Fontane), and an author of popular adventure and
travel prose (Friedrich Gerstäcker). In opposition to Kafka, the other four
were immensely popular during their own and Kafka’s lifetime. Without making
too strong assumptions on the basis of the two particular dendrograms
Stylometric methods such as cluster analysis applied to literary data
typically involve a series of tests with different parameter settings,
including varying the distance measure, the number of mfw, the linkage
algorithm, and others (cf. (#eder2017)
(#evert2015)
(#jannidis2014), for German literature). It has been
pointed out that this kind of scenario is prone to cherry
picking, i.e. omitting results that do not fit the
expected/desired outcome (#rudman2003). The overall
results, specifically the bootstrap consensus tree, however, give some
reason to assume that Kafka is indeed an author with a distinct – if not
solitary – style. Yet, the single dendrograms vary with regard to Kaka’s
nearest neighbors. Therefore, all obtained results need to be further
evaluated, and possibly sided by experiments with other parameter
settings., these results may be used as a heuristic for
furthering the stylistic research into Kafka’s prose: It is common ground in
literary studies that Kafka achieved the commonly attested refusal
of making sense (Sinnverweigerung),with the
techniques of the European tradition of narration (mit den
Mitteln der europäischen Erzähltradition). In Fig. 3 and 4 this tradition appears to show itself in
the form of the nearest neighbors, all of which allegedly use a
realistic writing style (with a great amount of
concrete detail and vividly rendered descriptions, as well as dialogue).
Further study needs to establish whether there really is a stylistic
similarity with these authors (and among them), and, if so, what features
contribute. What is more, Kafka research has shown that he liked reading
books for younger readers, as well as (popular) adventure literature and
journey descriptions in general (e.g., (#blank2001)). There is
hence some reason to assume that the nearest neighbors may reflect some of
Kafka’s own reading habits (#herrmannlauer2016). This kind of
speculation merits further pursuing.
This is where the analysis of this particular quantitative measure stops,
letting the aggregated data speak for itself. However, in the present
context, it is not really much it can say, despite a relatively weak
corroboration of the reported hypothesis, which originates from rich
hermeneutic observations. One problem with the measure is here that we do
not know which particular textual features are responsible for the
dissimilarity (or similarity) of styles: it computes the relative stylistic
differences between a whole range of texts, based on a ‘bag-of-words’
approach that has to take a priori decisions about the number
of mfw, the linkage algorithms, and other parameters. This combination of
black box and cherry picking
problems (for a critical overview, see (#eder2017)) is rather
frustrating, especially to the philologist, who would like to pin down the
specific textual features that make Kafka unique (for quantitative
approaches to features, see for example (#jockers2013)
(#klaussner2015)). The next step is applying a so-called
keyness analysis, which allows for an exploration of the
features responsible for stylistic differences between distinct texts and
text collections.
Study 2: Quantitative Exploration
To pry open the black box of the Delta measure to examine the features that
actually make a difference in an author’s style, I selected keyness analysis
(#herrmann2013b). This established measure of corpus
stylistics compares the frequencies of single words (or part-of-speech tags,
or semantic tags) included in some text (collection) with those obtained in
a (normally larger) reference corpus. It outputs a long list of words that
deviate statistically from that reference corpus (#rayson2012)
(#scott2006). Here, the reference corpus acts as a statistical
norm against which the word use in the text(s)
under scrutiny may be compared. The examined words, depending on whether
they deviate positively or negatively, are thus over-
or under-represented with regard to that norm. Keyness
analysis traditionally applies a Log-likelihood (LL) measure of difference
in word usage (which is here more reliable than chi-squared analysis, cf.
(#rayson2012)
In order to ensure internal validity across sub-studies, I used the same
corpus as in the cluster analysis. The same Kafka samples included in the
first study thus formed a Kafka corpus, and the
remaining 67 texts samples now worked as a reference corpus. In addition to
the Kafka corpus, I compiled four new author corpora, extracted from
TextGrid: Peter Altenberg, Gustav Meyrink, Arthur Schnitzler, and Georg
Trakl (see Table 1 for a summary of the author and reference corpora). In
order to control as many factors as possible, the time signal was kept
relatively constant: authors were selected from the literary epoch Modernism
(roughly 1880-1930). Also, all authors are male, and ideolect was
controlled: the four authors share with Kafka a place at a
southern German language continuum
(#becher2012)
(#nekula2003). However, given the particularities of Kafka’s
(many very short texts and his particular technique of rendering narrative
perspective), I deliberately did not control genre, and included drama
(Schnitzler’s dramatic work, with its high proportion of fictional
dialogue), poetry (Trakl’s poems with their highly subjective and sensual
perspective), and (short) experimental prose (Altenberg’s
narrative poems with a
disengaged perspective, impressionistic description
of sensual perception, and usage of colloquialisms). Through this, I hoped
to allow for emerging stylistic patterns particular to Kafka.
Epoch
Author
No. of words
Modernism
Kafka
~308,400

Altenberg
~245,200

Trakl
~21,300

Meyrink
~156,500

Schnitzler
~1,037,000
Newer German Literature
22 authors
~5,873,100
Using the software tool AntConc (#anthony2014) the analysis
rendered word lists that are significantly more common in each of the
respective target corpora than in the reference corpus Newer
German Literature (about 5.9 million words). Comparable
to the oppose-function of the stylo-package (#eder2016), which has been further developed since the
time of writing. I decided to examine these lists for word
classes (part-of-speech, POS) in order to observe not content (as a tendency
indicated by proper names and common nouns), but rather stylistic patterns.
According to authorship attribution studies, the latter may be observed
especially among functional word classes. My research questions were:

What differences between the five authors are striking among the top
100 keywords?
Which word classes are particularly common in Kafka when compared to
the other authors?

The distribution of word classes among the top 100 keywords in each
author-corpus rendered a number of interesting findings (see also (#herrmann2013b)). For the current purpose, however, the most
interesting one is this: Among the words most strongly overrepresented in
Kafka’s prose, a variety falls into a category of potential modal
words, which I operationally defined as word forms that (a)
possess few semantic features when decontextualized; and (b) are typically
used as adverbs, negations, and modal particles (but may have functions as
conjunctions or other types of particles). For reasons of focus, I excluded
(modal) verbs from the analysis. The observed types (e.g., aber, nicht, allerdings, vielleicht, schon, ja,
auch) are semantically very flexible, potentially exerting
distinct functions across different co(n)texts, e.g., to manage
doubt/certainty, limit/broaden scope of assertions, and for
negative/positive evaluation.

Number of modal words identified in the keyness
analysis (Kafka, Altenberg, Trakl, Schnitzler, Meyrink)
Figure 5 shows the number of modal words identified in
the keyness analysis for each of the five authors: The distinct types show
up among the 100 statistically overrepresented word-forms (e.g., the types
ja, doch, schon amounting to three
counts). Fig. 5 reports that Kafka’s usage of this category is more
substantial (N=27) than Altenberg’s (N=13) Altenberg was newly
introduced for the present analysis. Because of his colloquial style, I
extrapolated that he might use adverbs, negations, and modal particles
in a similar way as Kafka. However, the result is very similar to that
of Schnitzler, and the number of types among the top 100 keywords is
only half of Kafka’s., Schnitzler’s (N=12), Meyrink’s (N=7), and
Trakl’s (N=1). Given the reference corpus, Kafka’s prose is hence marked by
a more varied use of modal words. The present
analysis has good external validity, as shown by prior analysis (#herrmann2013b) based on a much larger and more varied
reference corpus (~ 93,000 texts, ~ 600 authors, ~ 134 million words,
diverse genres). Comparison shows very similar results for Kafka (N=24
(big reference corpus) vs. N=27 (present corpus)) and Schnitzler (N=10
(big reference corpus) vs. N=12 (present corpus)), and numerically
identical ones for Meyrink (N=7) and Trakl (N=1). Since the larger
corpus is closer to an assumed true population of
newer German literature, there is good reason to assume that the
findings obtained can be generalized by taking as a stylistic
norm a larger population (of texts, genres, and
authors across time).Specifically in their use as modal
particles, words like ja, schon, doch, and
nur may exert very subtle, but
important, pragmatic functions of negotiating shared knowledge and beliefs.
Note that they belong among the most frequent words of the German language
generally, but are still overrepresented in Kafka’s prose – at least when
compared with our reference corpus of literary texts. They may thus be a key
to explaining (aspects of) Kafka’s subtly disconcerting style. However, more
analysis is needed to further test this assumption.
To sum up, the application of keyness analysis to Kafka and other Modernist
authors has pointed to a quantitative style pattern in Kafka’s prose, a high
frequency of lemmas that may perform modal functions in
the discourse. While it is clear that more research is required – for
example varying reference corpora with principled attention to the variable
genre (the used corpora contain narrative texts as
well as poems and dramatic texts), and using more author-corpora – the
analysis has shown that an exploration of quantitative patterns in terms of
single words is quite useful. Indeed, it provides a first take at answering
the question of what underlies the clustering observed in the
Quantitative Hypothesis Testing. It could not falsify the
philological finding that Kafka’s style is defined by a particular use of
modal adverbs (e.g., (#trost2008)).
However, the identified category of lemmas needs disambiguation as to their
grammatical categories and local functions in textual passages. We thus need
more context.
Study 3: Qualitative Text Analysis
The third step of my project breaks down the complexity of the broad list of
modal-type words run up by the keyword list, by
zooming in on just two lemmas, namely, ja
and doch
(#herrmann2016). As modal particles, both have been well
described in the linguistic literature and belong to the most frequent
German modal particles (#hentschel1986). Generally, modal
particles cater to intentionally attaching an utterance to the
conversational frame, structure the common knowledge base of the
interlocutors by indicating common ground, give prompts as to the felicitous
interpretation of utterances in the given context, indicate subjective
stance of speakers, and establish anaphoric reference with prior
discourse.

KWIC list of all instances of ja in
Kafka’s Das Urteil (The Judgment)
In answer to the research question What functions do the modal particles
ja and doch exert in Kafka’s short narration The Judgment (1912)?, the method of choice
was a digital type of close reading of the text. – I used a digital KWIC
(Keyword in Context) tool for a starting point. There
are many KWIC tools available online, e.g. in Voyant, AntConc, as well
as functions in R and Python. Figure 6 shows that of the N=18
instances of ja, n=12 may be identified as
modal particles; and a similar picture can be observed for doch, where of N=19 retrieved instances, n=9 are
clear modal particles. This frequency roughly equals the proportion of each
word found in natural spoken discourse in
German (#hentschel1986).
The combined linguistic/narratological examination of the usage of ja and doch
throughout the story revealed that the two lemmas mostly do not accord with
the causality structure of the narrated world (for details, see (#herrmann2016): The two characters, a father and his son, do
not communicate on the basis of a reliable common ground. Instead, there are
constant shifts in basic beliefs, and thus, in part due to the use of modal
particles (or accompanied by them as symptoms of underlying communicative
shortcomings) the management of information fails epically, resulting in the
death of the son. In particular, ja is
normally used to signal that interlocutor A assumes that interlocutor B
maintains a shared knowledge/belief at the present point in time; doch is normally used to signal that
interlocutor A assumes that interlocutor B is presently not aware of an
allegedly shared knowledge/belief. However, in The
Judgment, the characters often use them in an infelicitous way,
not respecting conventional pragmatic principles. The fact that in terms of
frequency, the modal particles in Kafka’s fictional narrative roughly equal
the natural distribution in spoken language may explain the overuse
identified in the keyness analysis, especially when assuming that modal
particles are overall not as frequent in fictional writing. Speculatively,
one may adopt the idea that the use of ja
and doch in The
Judgment is typical for Kafka’s use of modal particles in
general, especially taking into account that modal particles are indicators
of free indirect discourse, which is one of the properties frequently
assigned to Kafka’s prose.
Yet, more (quantitative and qualitative) analysis is needed to further flesh
out and test these hypotheses. For now, it may be stated that the use of two
specific modal particles indeed seems to contribute to the elevated
everyday language described as typical of Kafka’s style (in Metamorphosis, cf. (#trost2008)).
The examination of two modal particles in one particular text used the local
lexical/syntactical context as well as that of the story world with its
complex social-communicative relations. Since modal particles are heavily
dependent on contextual analysis, both levels are essential when striving to
make well-informed statements about their function in Kafka’s style.
To sum up, this article has presented new findings on Kafka’s prose (compared
to other authors writing in German) gathered in complementary successive
analysis. It tested philological findings by means of a method of data
aggregation operating on a comparably large data set, explored author’s
style by looking at the probabilities of word frequencies, and eventually
zoomed into the possible functions of two modal particles within the text
world of one story. To ensure compatibility, my study kept the reference
corpus constant, and varied the style measure only subtly (both quantitative
analyses work with raw quantities of inflected word forms, and two of these
word forms were queried through KWIC in the particular story The Judgment).
Yet, my main objective was to raise awareness of the methodological issues of
doing digital stylistics. The different steps varied in the way in which
they approached Kafka’s style – quantitatively and qualitatively,
explanatory and exploratory, deductively and inductively, and also in the
degree of speculation and interpretative freedom licensed. With regard to
quantitative analysis, I have highlighted that hypothesis testing in the
strict sense of the term is still a desideratum in my work. The same holds
for analysis of statistical correlations and interactions on a broader data
basis. My future research will take care of this: We are currently building
a Corpus of Literary Modernism (KOLIMO, see footnote
above) for examining the possible relations between factors such as author,
genre, time of publication etc. and style variables such as part of speech,
lexical density, and readability, but also more traditionally literary
features such as metaphor (#herrmann2018)

Conclusions
Above, I first proposed that the interdisciplinary setup of DH stylistics has
advantages and disadvantages, depending on how we handle the issue, and that in
fact, DH style studies may be a natural environment for the mixed-methods
paradigm. To contextualize this, I have reported on my own research, assuming
that in terms of its general character, it may be quite representative of
digital text analysis, even though the range of methods and questions found in
DH stylistics is naturally much wider. For reasons of focus, further crucial
dimensions of doing DH stylistics that relate to research design have not been
mentioned, such as programming, sample selection, edition and publication.
I pointed out that in some moments, in line with a ‘quantitative paradigm’, we
may strive for open questions to be settled, and possibilities for
interpretation of results to be delimited in order to achieve significant and
replicable results. At other points of the research process, we may tap into the
qualitative paradigm, in line with our hermeneutic
tradition, allowing higher degrees of (aesthetic) subjectivity, generating
ideas, and opening discussion of alleged securities. Pointing towards a
mixed-methods paradigm, I would now like to conclude by
considering Moretti’s take on distant reading:
If we want to understand the system in its entirety, we
must accept losing something. We always pay a price for theoretical
knowledge: reality is infinitely rich; concepts are abstract, are poor.
But it’s precisely this ‘poverty’ that makes it possible to handle them,
and therefore to know. This is why less is actually more.
(#moretti2000)
My point in this paper has been to embrace distant reading's
variable-driven principle, but to complement it by a paradigm that is
case-driven, looks at smaller samples, and may indulge in open-ended
interpretation about connections between different variables. Both general
approaches have their merit, and tapping into the methodological flexibility
offered by a mixed-methods paradigm will allow for the interaction of different
mindsets in a structured way.
By mutual methods critique, we may more vigorously utilize the meaning potential
of crunched numbers, as well as sharpen hermeneutically obtained insight to a
new degree of precision. Here, the digital turn is possibly what really
accelerates the growth of a third culture in the sense of Snow (#snow2012) – one that has explanatory as well as exploratory
moments, with thick’ understanding as well as the
poverty of aggregation mentioned by Moretti. A
mixed-method paradigm includes approaches for ‘opening up the discussion’ as
much as those that ‘settle it’.
Author’s Note
Many thanks to the editorial team, led by Joris van Zundert, for invoking and
guiding the volume, as well as for their feedback at multiple stages of the
publication process. Thanks also to the three anonymous reviewers who provided
me not only with detailed and constructive feedback, but who also were generous
in pointing out the things they valued. A big thank you to Andrea Hense, an ally
from the Sociological Research Institute Göttingen
(SOFI) and to Steffen Kühnel of the Center of Methods in
Social Sciences at Göttingen University, both of whom made time for
discussing my research. And finally, many thanks to Camilla di Biase-Dyson, who
proof-read an earlier version of the paper, and to Zsófia Demjen, for
proof-reading the final version. Any remaining errors are my own.


Adorno, T. W. (1981). Notes on Kafka. In S. WeberS. Weber (Trans.),
Prisms (pp. 243–271). Cambridge Mass.: MIT
Press.
Algee-Hewitt, M.,
Allison, S., Gemma, M., Heuser, R., Moretti, F.,Walser, H. (2016). Canon/Archive. Large-scale dynamics in the Literary
Field.
Stanford Literary Lab Pamphlet, 11. Retrieved from
http://litlab.stanford.edu/LiteraryLabPamphlet11.pdf.
Anderson, C. (2008). The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific Method
Obsolete. Retrieved July 24, 2013, from http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/magazine/16-07/pb_theory

Anthony, L. (2014). AntConc (Version
3.4.4). Tokyo, Japan: Waseda University. Retrieved from http://www.laurenceanthony.net/

Borgman, C. L. (2015). Big data, little data, no data: scholarship in the networked
world. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Becher, P., Höhne, S.,
Nekula, M. (Eds.). (2012). Kafka und
Prag: Literatur-, kultur-, sozial- und sprachhistorische
Kontexte.Köln: Böhlau.
Biber, D. (1988). Variation across speech and writing. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Biber, D. (2011). Corpus linguistics and the study of literature: Back to the future?
Scientific Study of Literature, 1(1), 15–23. 10.1075/ssol.1.1.02bib.
Biber, D.,Reppen, R.
(2015). The Cambridge Handbook of English Corpus
Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bird, S., Klein, E.,Loper,
E. (2015). Natural Language Processing with Python –
Analyzing Text with the Natural Language Toolkit. Retrieved from
http://www.nltk.org/book/
Blank, H. (2001). In Kafkas Bibliothek : Werke der Weltliteratur
und Geschichte in der Edition,wie sie Kafka besaß oder kannte;
kommentiert mit Zitaten aus seinen Briefen und
Tagebüchern. Stuttgart: Blank.
Brenner, P. J. (2011). Neue deutsche Literaturgeschichte: vom “Ackermann” zu Günter
Grass (3., rev. and extended edition). Berlin: de Gruyter.
Burrows, J. F. (1987). Computation into criticism. A study of Jane Austen’s novels
and an experiment in method. Oxford: Clarendon.
Burrows, J. (2002). 'Delta': a measure of stylistic difference and a guide to
likely authorship.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17(3), 267 –287.
https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/17.3.267.
Craig, H. (1999). Authorial attribution and computational stylistics: if you can tell authors
apart, have you learned anything about them?
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 14(1), 103–113.
https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/14.1.103.
Craig, H. (2013, September). Middle-distance reading with information-theory
metrics. (Talk abstract). Retrieved from http://www.gcdh.de/en/events/calendar-view/prof.-hugh-craig-middle-distance-reading-with-information-theory-metrics1/
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design: qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches (4th ed.). Los Angeles: Sage.
Creswell, J. W.,
Plano Clark, V. L. (2007). Designing and conducting
mixed methods research. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
D’haen, T., Damrosch, D.,
Kadir, D. (2012). The Routledge companion to world
literature. London: Routledge.
Diversy, S., Evert, S.,
Neumann, S. (2014). A semi-supervised multivariate approach
to the study of language variation. In B. SzmrecsanyiB.
Wälchli (Eds.), Aggregating Dialectology, Typology, and
Register Analysis : Linguistic Variation in Text and Speech (pp.
174–204). Berlin: De Gruyter.
Dipper, S. (2008). Theory-driven and Corpus-driven Computational Linguistics, and
the Use of Corpora. In A. LüdelingM. Kytö (Eds.), Corpus Linguistics. An International Handbook (pp.
68–96). Berlin: De Gruyter.
Eder, M. (2017). Visualization in Stylometry: Cluster Analysis Using Networks.
Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, Volume 32,
Issue 1(1), 50–64. http://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqv061

Eder, M., Kestemont, M.,
Rybicki, J. (2016). Stylometry with R: A package for
computational text analysis.
R Journal, 16(1). Retrieved from https://journal.r-project.org/archive/accepted/
Engel, M. (2010). Drei Werkphasen. In M. Engel
B. Auerochs (Eds.), Kafka-Handbuch. Leben, Werk, Wirkung (pp. 81–90).
Stuttgart: Metzler.
Eibl, K. (2013). Ist Literaturwissenschaft als
Erfahrungswissenschaft möglich? Mit einigen Anmerkungen zur
Wissenschaftsphilosophie des Wiener Kreises. In P.
Ajouri, K. Mellmann,C. Rauen (Eds.), Empirie in der Literaturwissenschaft
(pp. 19–45). Münster: Mentis.
Evert, S., Proisl, T., Jannidis,
F., Pielström, S., Schöch, C.,Vitt, T. (2015). Towards a better understanding of Burrows’s Delta in literary authorship
attribution.
Proceedings of NAACL-HLT Fourth Workshop on Computational
Linguistics for Literature, 79–88.
Fish, S. (2012, January 23). Mind your p’s and b’s: The digital humanities and
interpretation.
Opinionator, New York Times. Retrieved from http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/01/23/mind-your-ps-and-bs-the-digital-humanities-and-interpretation/
Frenzel, H. A.,
Frenzel, E. (1990). Daten deutscher Dichtung. Band II: Vom
Realismus bis zur Gegenwart. München: Dt. Taschenbuch-Verl.
Gius, E.,Jacke, J.
(2015). Informatik und Hermeneutik.
Zum Mehrwert interdisziplinärer Textanalyse. In C.
BaumT. Stäcker (Eds.), Grenzen und Möglichkeiten der Digital Humanities. Sonderband der
Zeitschrift für digitale Geisteswissenschaften (Vol.
1). Retrieved from http://www.zfdg.de/informatik-und-hermeneutik-zum-mehrwert-interdisziplin%C3%A4rer-textanalyse

Gooding, P. (2013). Mass digitization and the garbage dump: The conflicting needs
of quantitative and qualitative methods.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 28(3), 425–431.
http://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqs054
Gries, S. Th. (2015). Some Current Quantitative Problems in Corpus Linguistics and a
Sketch of Some Solutions.
Language and Linguistics 16(1), 93–117. https://doi.org/10.1177/1606822X14556606.
Hayles, N. K. (2012). How we think : digital media and contemporary
technogenesis. Chicago; London: The University of Chicago
Press.
Hentschel, E. (1986). Funktion und Geschichte deutscher
Partikeln: Ja, doch, halt und eben. Berlin: De
Gruyter.
Herrmann, J. B. (2018). Anschaulichkeit messen. Eine quantitative Metaphernanalyse an
deutschsprachigen Erzählanfängen zwischen 1880 und 1926. [Measuring Stylistic Vividness. A quantitative metaphor
analysis of the beginning sections of German narrative fiction 1880
-1926]. In T. KöppeR. Singer (Eds.), Show, don’t tell: Konzepte und Strategien anschaulichen Erzählens.
Bielefeld: Aisthesis.
Herrmann, J. B. (2016). 'Läuse im Pelz der Sprache?' Zu
Funktionen von Modalpartikeln in narrativen (De-)Motivierungsstrategien
bei Franz Kafka. In M. HorváthK. Mellmann
(Eds.), Die biologisch-kognitiven
Grundlagen narrativer Motivierung. Münster:
Mentis.
Herrmann, J. B. (2013a). Kafka among the authors. Stylometric analyses.
(Paper). Presented at the Expert Workshop, Stylometry@Kraków. Krakow.
Herrmann, J. B. (2013b). Computing Kafka - How keyness and collocation analysis help
explain paradoxical style. Talk and poster presented at the
International Herrenhausen Conference (Digital) Humanities
Revisited – Challenges and Opportunities in the Digital Age.
Herrenhausen.
Herrmann, J. B., van
Dalen-Oskam, K.,Schöch, C. (2015). Revisiting style,
a key concept in literary studies.
Journal of Literary Theory, 9(1), 25-52. 10.1515/jlt-2015-0003.
Herrmann, J. B.,
Lauer, G. (2016). Aufbau und
Annotation des Kafka/Referenzkorpus. Paper presented
at the Conference Digital Humanities im deutschsprachigen Raum (DhD), Leipzig.
http://www.dhd2016.de/abstracts/vortr%C3%A4ge-011.html

Heyer, G., Quasthoff, U.,
Wittig, T. (2006). Text Mining: Wissensrohstoff Text:
Konzepte, Algorithmen, Ergebnisse. Herdecke : W3L-Verl.
Holmes, D. I. (1998). The Evolution of Stylometry in Humanities Scholarship.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 13(3), 111–117.
http://doi.org/10.1093/llc/13.3.111

Hoover, D. L. (2004). Testing Burrows’s Delta.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 19(4), 453–475.
http://doi.org/10.1093/llc/19.4.453

Hoover, D. L. (2013). Quantitative Analysis and Literary Studies. In R.
SiemensS. Schreibman (Eds.), A Companion to Digital
Literary Studies (pp. 517–533). John WileySons, Ltd.
Retrieved from http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781405177504.ch28/summary

Hoover, D. L., Culpeper, J.,
O’Halloran, K. (2014). Digital literary studies:
Corpus approaches to poetry, prose, and drama. New York: Routledge,
TaylorFrancis Group.
Jannidis, F.,
Lauer, G. (2014). Burrows’s Delta and its use in German
literary history. In M. ErlinL. Tatlock (Eds.), Distant Readings. Topologies of German Culture in the Long
Nineteenth Century (pp. 29–54). Rochester, New York: Camden
House.
Jannidis, F., Steffen
Pielström, Christoph Schöch, and Thorsten Vitt (2015). Improving Burrows Delta. An empirical evaluation of text distance
measures. In Abstracts for the Digital
Humanities 2015, Sidney. Retrieved from http://dh2015.org/abstracts/xml/JANNIDIS_Fotis_Improving_Burrows__Delta___An_empi/JANNIDIS_Fotis_Improving_Burrows__Delta___An_empirical_.html

Jockers, M. L. (2013). Macroanalysis: digital methods and literary history.
Urbana, Ill.: Univ. of Illinois Press.
Jockers, M. L. (2014). Text analysis with R for students of literature. Cham:
Springer.
Johnson, R. B.,
Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2004). Mixed Methods Research: A
Research Paradigm Whose Time Has Come.
Educational Researcher, 33(7), 14–26. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X033007014.
Kelle, U. (2008). Die Integration qualitativer und quantitativer
Methoden in der empirischen Sozialforschung: theoretische Grundlagen und
methodologische Konzepte (2nd Ed.). Wiesbaden: VS,
Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Klaussner, C., Nerbonne,
J.,Çöltekin, Ç. (2015). Finding Characteristic Features in Stylometric
Analysis. Digital Scholarship in the Humanities,
30(suppl 1), i114–i129. http://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqv048

Leech, G. N.,Short, M.
(2007). Style in fiction. A linguistic introduction to
English fictional prose (2nd ed). New York: Pearson Longman.
Macmillan Publishers (Ed.). (2015).
kafkaesque. Macmillan Dictionary and Thesaurus
Online. Retrieved from http://www.macmillandictionary.com/dictionary/british/kafkaesque

Mahlberg, M. (2013). Corpus Stylistics and Dickens’s Fiction. London:
Routledge.
Mahlberg, M. (2015). Literary style and literary texts. In The Cambridge Handbook of English Corpus Linguistics.
Cambridge University Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139764377.020

Manovich, L. (2015). Data Science and Digital Art History.
International Journal for Digital Art History,
0(1). http://dx.doi.org/10.11588/dah.2015.1.21631.
McCarty, W. (2005). Humanities computing. BasingstokeNew York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Meindl, C. (2011). Methodik für Linguisten. Eine
Einführung in Statistik und Versuchsplanung. Tübingen:
Narr.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M.,
Saldaña, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: a
methods sourcebook (3rd ed.). Los Angeles, Calif.: Sage Publ.
Moretti, F. (2000). Conjectures on world literature. New Left Review, (1). Retrieved from https://newleftreview.org/II/1/franco-moretti-conjectures-on-world-literature.
Mueller, M. (2012, May 29). Scalable Reading. (Blog-entry). Retrieved from https://scalablereading.northwestern.edu/scalable-reading/

Müller, R. (2013). Parallelstellenmethode – digital. Wie
computer-gestützte Korpus-Analysen die Hermeneutik
empirisieren. In P. Ajouri, K. Mellmann,C.
Rauen (Eds.), Empirie in der
Literaturwissenschaft. Mentis: Münster.
Nekula, M. (2003). Franz Kafkas Deutsch.
Linguistik Online, 13(1). Retrieved from https://bop.unibe.ch/linguistik-online/article/view/879/1533

Ness, P. H. V., Fried, T. R.,
Gill, T. M. (2011). Mixed methods for the interpretation of
longitudinal gerontologic data. Insights from philosophical
hermeneutics.
Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 5(4), 293–308.
Oschmann, D. (2010). Kafka als Erzähler. In M. EngelB. Auerochs
(Eds.), Kafka-Handbuch (pp. 438–449). Stuttgart: J.
B. Metzler.
Punch, K. F. (2014). Introduction to social research: Quantitative and qualitative
approaches (3., [rev.] ed.). Los Angeles: Sage.
Ramsay, S. (2011). Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism.
Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
Ransom, J. C. (1937). Criticism, Inc.
VQR Online, 13(4). Retrieved
from http://www.vqronline.org/essay/criticism-inc-0

Rayson, P. (2012). Corpus analysis of key words. In The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics. Blackwell. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781405198431.wbeal0247

Rudman, J. (2003). Cherry Picking in Nontraditional Authorship Attribution
Studies.
CHANCE, 16(2), 26–32. https://doi.org/10.1080/09332480.2003.10554845.
Rudman, J. (2016). Non-Traditional Authorship Attribution Studies of William
Shakespeare’s Canon: Some Caveats.
Journal of Early Modern Studies, 5(0), 307–328.
https://doi.org/10.13128/JEMS-2279-7149-18094.
Scheffel, M. (2002). 'Das Urteil' - Eine Erzählung ohne
'geraden zusammenhängenden, verfolgbaren Sinn'? Strukturalismus mit
strukturaler Erzähltheorie. In O. JahrausS.
Neuhaus (Eds.), Kafkas "Urteil" und
die Literaturtheorie. Zehn Modellanalysen (pp. 59–77).
Stuttgart: Reclam.
Scott, M.,Tribble, C.
(2006). Textual patterns: Key words and corpus analysis in
Language Education. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Sculley, D.,
Pasanek, B. M. (2008). Meaning and mining: the impact of
implicit assumptions in data mining for the humanities.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 23(4), 409–424.
http://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqn019

Semino, E.,Short, M.
(2004). Corpus stylistics. Speech, writing and thought
presentation in a corpus of English writing. London: Routledge.
Simpson, P. (2004). Stylistics. A resource book for students. London:
Routledge.
Sinclair, S.,
Rockwell, G. (2016). Voyant Tools. Web. Retrieved
from http://voyant-tools.org/
Snow, C. P. (2012). The Two Cultures [1959]. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Spitzer, L. (1961). Stilstudien [1928]. Erster Teil:
Sprachstile. Zweiter Teil: Stilsprachen,
München: Max Hueber.
Stamatatos, E. (2009). A Survey of Modern Authorship Attribution Methods.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 60(3), 538–556. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/asi.21001.
Steen, G. J., Dorst, A. G.,
Herrmann, J. B., Kaal, A. A.,Krennmayr, T. (2010). Metaphor in Usage.
Cognitive Linguistics, 21(4). https://doi.org/10.1515/cogl.2010.024.
Symonds, J. E.,
Gorard, S. (2010). Death of mixed methods? Or the rebirth
of research as a craft.
EvaluationResearch in Education, 23(2),
121–136. https://doi.org/10.1080/09500790.2010.483514.
Tashakkori, A.,
Teddlie, C. (Eds.). (2010). Sage handbook of mixed
methods in socialbehavioral research (2nd ed.). Los Angeles:
Sage.
Trost, I. (2008). Erzählen und Besprechen: zum Stil von Franz
Kafkas Erzählung 'Die Verwandlung'. In: Fritz, Th. A.,
Koch, G.Trost, I., Literaturstil - sprachwissenschaftlich. Festschrift für Hans-Werner
Eroms zum 70. Geburtstag (pp. 144–168). Heidelberg:
Universitätsverlag.
Underwood, T. (2017). A Genealogy of Distant Reading,
DH Quarterly, 11(2). Retrieved from http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/2/000317/000317.html.
Van Peer, W., Hakemulder,
J.,Zyngier, S. (2012). Scientific methods for the
humanities. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
van Zundert, J.
J. (2015). Screwmeneutics and Hermenumericals. In
S. Schreibman, R. Siemens,J. Unsworth (Eds.), A New
Companion to Digital Humanities (pp. 331–347). Wiley. 10.1002/9781118680605.ch23.
Weitin, T. (2017). Scalable Reading.
Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und
Linguistik, 47(1), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41244-017-0048-4.

