Digital Humanities on Reserve: From Reading Room to
               Laboratory at Yale University Library
Catherine DeRose
Peter Leonard
25 September 2020


Introduction

The Franke Family Digital Humanities Laboratory. Photo
credit: Mara Lavitt.
A historic reading room from 1931 is the site of one of the newest scholarly support
environments at Yale University: The Franke Family Digital Humanities Laboratory.
While neither the first renovation of the space — the room shifted from reserve books
to periodicals in the 1970s — nor the first home of the lab, which relocated from a
room requiring a campus ID for access to a publicly accessible, much larger space —
the transition of a reading room to a digital humanities (DH) laboratory represented
a new kind of commitment from the Library that required structural, aesthetic, and
programmatic transformations. The goal was to create a collaborative, open workspace
where the practice of digital humanities would be visible, accessible, and supported
within Sterling Memorial Library, the so-named heart of the
university
(#schiff2005). Specific design and policy interventions informed the
reimagining of this central and symbolic space. This article considers the role of DH
labs as humanities infrastructure, with a focus on how
location, materials, and services could be designed to support DH research and
training within libraries.
The transformation of this particular room, and the services found inside it, are
part of a larger process of libraries formalizing their support for digital
humanities in response to local needs and resourcing (#lippincott2015)
(#webb2018). As staff members in Yale University Library and DH
practitioners ourselves, we chronicle the project from the perspective of both
library service design and new forms of academic collaboration. Ethnographic study,
user-centered design, and a focus on the materiality of both physical and digital
collections combine to suggest one pathway for research libraries to create spaces
that offer localized support for collaborative digital work in the humanities.
From Reading Room to Digital Humanities Lab: Reimagining a Library Support Space

The Reserve Book Room in April 1931, shortly after opening. Photo credit: Yale University Manuscripts & Archives.
In the 2019 Debates in Digital Humanities, Neil Fraistat
calls for a reimagining of lab programming, one that moves away from faculty
fellowships toward incubator models that provide more training and capacity-building
support (#fraistat2019). We extend this call to consider how the
physical design of labs contributes to the services offered therein. Many
universities and colleges have built successful models where a DH lab or center is
affiliated with a single department or faculty lead: Stanford’s Literary Lab was at
one point physically housed within the English department, for example. More and
more, however, labs are forming within libraries. Joan Lippincott observes that
more libraries are recognizing that they may want to invest
resources, including staff expertise and time, technology infrastructure such as
repositories, and physical spaces such as digital scholarship centers or labs, to
make a more formal commitment by the library to this type of scholarship
(#lippincott2015). This extension of library support for digital
training spans the United States, with examples from the University of California Los
Angeles, the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Rutgers University, University of
Virginia, and Brown University, to name a few. But even within libraries, the focus
and design of labs vary. Katy Kavanagh Webb’s recent survey of digital support
separates labs into groups covering Digital Media, Digital Humanities, Data
Visualization, and Makerspaces (2018), each of which has its own spatial constraints
with respect to the kind and amount of hardware needed, which in turn affects its
design flexibility.
At Yale, the Digital Humanities Lab (DHLab) has always been physically and
organizationally located within the Library, tasked from the beginning with
supporting scholarship across the humanities broadly considered. In addition to
departmental diversity, the audience for DH support has included a broad set of
clients, from Yale College students, graduate students, faculty, curators, and
librarians to occasional collaborations with external partners. This range of
disciplinary and professional perspectives presented unique opportunities and
challenges for designing a space that would be inspiring, inclusive, and
functional.
Moving DH labs into libraries invites a rethinking of library spaces that were
originally designed for oftentimes siloed engagements. Completed in 1931, Sterling
Memorial Library contains nearly 450,000 square feet of space to support learning and
research. Positioned immediately to the left of the main entrance, the Reserve Book
Room (Figure 2) was an integral part of architect James Gamble Rogers’ design. The
room and its support areas total over 4,000 square feet and were designed to hold
10,000 volumes on wooden shelves that flank the northwest and southeast walls. Large
expanses of leaded glass windows bring filtered natural light into the room, rising
to a ceiling of decorative plasterwork and chandeliers. The abundance of
craftsmanship is characteristic of Sterling Memorial Library as a whole, completed at
a time when the Great Depression enabled new campus construction nationwide at
relatively low cost. Yet the Reserve Room itself was described by contemporary
observers as a place of relative moderation: Inasmuch as the
Reserve Book Room is really a work room where students go for study, wrote
alum Ellery Husted in the Yale Library Gazette the year
of Sterling’s opening, its architectural treatment is more
restrained than the other large reading rooms which filled the main floor
of the new library (#husted1931). The Reserve Book Room served its role
as designed well into the 1970s, when the construction of the new underground
Cross-Campus Library (now renamed Bass Library) opened up more modern space for
perusal of reserved books. As a result, in 1973, the room changed its function to
housing periodicals, continuing in that capacity through a renovation in the late
1990s that included new furniture and a renaming to the Franke Family Reading Room in
honor of a gift from Barbara and Richard Franke (Class of 1953), who share a longtime
commitment to supporting the humanities.
By the early 2010s, consensus had built on campus that the room could serve a more
prominent role in the future of research in the arts and humanities. With the
availability of other rooms within Sterling to hold print periodicals, the space
seemed ripe for reimagination. Discussions imagined a Digital Center for Arts and
Humanities, modeled on the successful launch of the Center for Science and
Social Science Information (CSSSI) in a 1960s building in 2012 (#fox2012)
(#thondavadi2012). That renovation project successfully provided a home
for the science and science libraries, 24-hour study space, and support for data
analysis in the basement of a science building. Subject specialists in that new space
worked in glass offices surrounding a central collaborative work area, where advanced
statistical consulting was also provided by graduate students. CSSSI thus provided a
new template at Yale for how subject specialists, technology, and data services could
complement traditional library offerings such as print collections and periodicals.
The challenge was how to adapt this support model for a significantly older, and less
flexible, space.
Indeed, the design and materiality of the Franke Room was naturally much different
than the 1960s environment in which CSSSI was built. Instead of the basement of a
mid-century building, the Franke Room contained wooden carvings, leaded glass, and
plasterwork designed to evoke the early English Renaissance. Built-in bookcases lined
the room up to a height of nine feet, transitioning to walls that were designed to
appear uneven, as if finished by hand.
At the same time, the integration of the Franke Room into the architectural and
material fabric of Sterling Memorial Library also offered advantages (Figure 3). In
contrast to the disciplinary-specific reading rooms on higher floors (and behind
access gates that require Yale IDs), the Franke Room is near the main entrance on the
ground floor, open and accessible to all, making it a strong candidate for a large
and welcoming space designated for the exploration of new ideas and methods.
As a design team of architects and library staff examined the room’s complex
materials and physical adjacencies, several intriguing possibilities emerged. Given
the room’s close proximity to the library’s physical collections, the reimagined
space could position DH as contiguous with older traditions of humanities research
rather than a radical break from it. The presence of a substantial print collection
in the building could serve as a reminder that the root material for many digital
projects is the print book or periodical. From a workflow perspective, this proximity
could also streamline the research process: if the lab had equipment available for
digitization, researchers could pull books from the stacks and bring them straight to
the lab where they could transform them into machine-actionable data.

The Franke Family Digital Humanities Laboratory (lower left) in the context of
Sterling Memorial Library.
The original infrastructure of the room also contained large amounts of hidden
reserve book shelving behind a long, adjacent wall that was accessible only to
library staff. The design of the DHLab re-imagined this back-of-house area,
opening it up to support collaborative meeting spaces and on-site offices for lab
staff. The 1930s ideal of hiding the mechanical aspects of scholarly support space
would give way to exposing this previously backstage area to the patrons in the main
room.
Requirements Gathering: Identifying and Responding to Local Needs
Planning for DH support at Yale coalesced in the early 2010s, ranging from
conferences (#yale2010)
(#yale2013) to graduate student-led working groups and informal
committees. (For an overview of reactions to this effort, see Svensson 2012.) The Library first advertised a
Librarian for Digital Humanities Research in the late 2000s, but did not fill the
position until 2013. Throughout this time period, graduate students, librarians, IT
staff, and faculty continued to advocate for more structured support — along with
dedicated space — for DH inside the library. These conversations were focused into an
informal committee led by the Deputy Provost for Humanities and Initiatives,
resulting in, among other things, a comprehensive survey of faculty and graduate
students who self-identified as having DH interests. This reportwas essential in cataloging and characterizing the ways
that scholars on campus wished to combine humanistic inquiry with new digital
techniques, and it laid the groundwork for coordinated effort to further Yale’s
support for scholarship in this area. In 2015, Yale University Library received
support from The Goizueta Foundation to inaugurate a comprehensive initiative in
science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics (STEAM) education by
launching the DHLab (#patrick2014). Recognizing the Franke Family
Reading Room as a natural home for the new initiative, the Library began a multi-year
design process with student, faculty, and staff stakeholders to identify campus needs
and aspirations for DH support, which would inform the design of the space.
Whereas the sciences have long-established models for constructing lab spaces
outfitted to their research needs, the humanities have operated more in a tradition
of individual work. DH labs create opportunities for collaborative work that brings
together different sets of expertise and equipment to pursue humanistic inquiries at
varying scales. The challenge in designing such a space revolves, in part, around
striking the right balance between different needs and possibilities. For example,
should the room be a fully open workspace, or should it provide areas explicitly
marked out for different functions? Which is more likely to spur activity: a space of
unstructured possibility, or one that actively suggests particular modes of
engagement? Is a computer with a large monitor actively displaying an interactive
visualization more, or less welcoming, than an open table? In describing Penn
Libraries’ integration of DH, Anu Vedantham and Dot Porter underscore that [s]paces designed to encourage brainstorming and discussion need to
look, feel, and function differently from those designed to support deep reading,
note taking, writing, or presentation practice
(#vedantham2015). Connected with the desired activity of the space,
however, is the overhead required to maintain it, from both a staffing and budgetary
consideration. What happens when the computer needs replacement – much sooner than
the table? Who will produce and update the content displaying on the digital screens?
A workspace unencumbered by machines affords different kinds of engagement with a
space and the people inside it than does one filled with monitors. The computer
lab concept, with rows of fixed workstations, seemed to the design team to
belong to an older model, which was confirmed by site visits to newly designed spaces
that were more flexible in their layout, with some equipment balanced by open
workspaces (Northeastern, Brown, and others). In their 2015 survey Building Expertise to Support Digital Scholarship: a Global
Perspective for CLIR, Lewis et al. noted variation in
the kind of facilities these organizations occupied;
collaborative space seemed to be more important than top-notch hardware
(#lewis2015). Columbia University’s Studio@Butler, for example, launched in 2013 with an explicit goal to
de-emphasize computing equipment in the service of foregrounding human collaboration
(#studio2013). At the same time, access to specialized hardware and
software normally out of the reach of students can lower barriers to casual
experimentation and initial engagement with digital forms of scholarship. The
question seems to be, then, what percentage of the room should equipment (computers,
scanners, virtual reality headsets, 3D printers) occupy?
To acknowledge, anticipate, and address, the specific DH needs on our campus, the
Library engaged design anthropologist Nancy Fried Foster, formerly the senior
anthropologist at Ithaka S+R, for an information-gathering phase during which she
helped collect input from the Yale community. With Fried Foster, the design team
conducted interviews during 2016 with current clients of the DHLab, as well as those
who had not used such services in the past. The goal of including researchers who did
not identify as digital humanists was to ensure that the design team did not
overfit the service portfolio and architectural design to those who had
already availed themselves of DH support services on campus. Fried Foster describes
the user-centered design process as one that begins with an
understanding of work practices and obstacles and then designs solutions to
support workflows and address identified problems. It is inclusive and
participatory, and is intended to improve outcomes by building a foundation of
valid, up-to-date information about the community for use by designers and
architects
(#foster2016). This phase of information gathering was
critical for grounding our assumptions of scholars’ spatial and technical needs with
respect to DH research. The user-driven assessment included three types of
engagements:
in-person interviews with students, faculty, and staff from different
disciplinary backgrounds — though predominantly from the humanities — many of
whom had been involved in DH activities on campus in some way, whether that
meant they attended workshops, came in for consultations, or had their own
projects underway (for more on the interview process, see Library Design and Ethnography, which describes a comparable
information-gathering process at the University of Rochester ).
design workshops during which participants were asked to imagine different
spatial, personnel, and technical configurations of the DHLab, and
benchmarking research informed by colleagues’ experiences at other
institutions via site visits, Skype conversations, and reading.
The design workshops were particularly illuminating for seeing how researchers
imagined engaging with the new space. The first workshop asked participants to draw
their ideal spaces, including what technology they would like to see in the room and
what sort of activities should be supported. The outputs from the first workshop
became the basis for the second workshop, which took the list of imagined equipment
and activities that might take place in the space (such as designated workshop areas,
staff offices, desktop computers, flexible workstations, reception desks) and printed
them on separate strips of papers. Participants then arranged those pieces of paper
around a space roughly scaled to the Franke Room. Each strip had multiple copies so
that if, for instance, a participant thought there should be five desktop computers
and two workshop areas, they could arrange the room accordingly. There was no
requirement that participants use strips from all of the different resource or
activity types.
Patterns from the sessions helped inform priorities for the renovation, including the
need for separate programmatic spaces for consultations, collaborative work, and
project exhibitions. Participants wanted to have ready access to DHLab staff, but
they recognized the need for staff to have occasional privacy as well. Large display
screens emerged as a significant request for both collaborative work and exhibitions,
which drove conversations among the design team toward the notion of a large-scale
data canvas as a possibility for visualizations. Meanwhile, conventional
desktop machines were lower on the list of must-have equipment: most students,
faculty, and staff preferred working from their own laptops, but they acknowledged
that a few high-end desktop computers in the DHLab would be helpful for accessing
software and for more computationally intensive projects.
While the feedback received during the information-gathering phase was generally
consistent, Fried Foster’s summative report (#foster2016) indicated a
few trends that appeared specific to university affiliation: faculty expressed the
most interest in defining the DH as a field, graduate students engaged the most with
DHLab activities (training and funding opportunities, sponsored talks, projects), and
undergraduates displayed the most curiosity and willingness to experiment, as well as
the strongest interest in combining the Arts and Humanities and STEM (a concept
denoted on campus as STEAM). Providing insight into researchers’ expectations and
work practices, the formal information-gathering phase shaped subsequent
conversations with architects over how to optimize the Franke Room to serve DH
scholars on campus.
During the time that design team was gathering requirements and beginning the
architectural rendering process, the newly-formed DHLab — consisting of a Director
(formerly the Digital Humanities Librarian) and the newly hired Engagement and
Outreach Manager, User Experience Designer, and Digital Humanities Developer — began
work in the repurposed rooms on the third floor. The constraints and opportunities of
this temporary space led to several lessons that would, coupled with the design
team’s assessment, inform the eventual design of the Franke Family Digital Humanities
Laboratory. In particular, the team learned that placing its reference print
collection of DH books on the old wooden shelves started innumerable conversations
with curious visitors as well as clients who made appointments to meet with staff or
other collaborators. As every book was placed on a metal stand that displayed its
cover to onlookers, the breadth and diversity of scholarly publications in titles as
Music Data Mining
(#li2011)Text Analysis with R for Students of
Literature
(#jockers2014) spurred conversation and thought even among
self-professed DH skeptics. In addition to theoretical and practical books on DH
methodologies, the Lab also selected critical texts that sought to cast a
complicating light on the larger, current Big Data moment: The Master Algorithm
(#domingos2018)Debates in the Digital
Humanities
(#gold2012)Algorithms of Oppression: How Search
Engines Reinforce Racism
(#noble2018)
(#monmonier2018)New Digital Worlds:
Postcolonial Digital Humanities in Theory, Praxis, and Pedagogy
(#risam2018) were among the titles that sought to bring nuance and
different perspectives to scholarly conversations around digital approaches. The
oldest book on the DHLab’s shelf reflected the uncertainty for how computational
methods would (or would not) be incorporated into humanistic pursuits: Computers for the Humanities? (1965) contains the
proceedings of a conference held on Yale’s campus, with the sponsorship of IBM, with
the terminal punctuation mark still an area of active debate amongst humanists and
digital humanists alike. Having Computers for the
Humanities? on the shelf of the DHLab creates a connection between Yale’s
early, little known — even to us — interest in how the humanities would take up
computation, and its present-day, expanded commitment to providing support for DH
research and teaching.